Delhi High Court
Head Of Department, Air Force ... vs Ram Kumar Giri Thr. Lrs on 12 November, 2009
Author: J.R. Midha
1. The appellants have challenged the award of the learned Tribunal whereby compensation of Rs.4,74,488/- has been awarded to the claimants/respondents No.1 to 5.
2. On 22nd May, 1999 at about 6:30 am, the deceased, Ram Kumar Giri along with his mother, wife and children, was going from Delhi to Shani Dev Mandir, Kokla by Tata Sumo bearing No.HR-26H-2105 and when they reached G.T. Road, Village Kulsipur, Palwal (Faridabad), the Air Force truck bearing No.BA No.89D 84861 came from the opposite direction on the wrong side of the road and hit the Tata Sumo resulting in grievous injuries to the deceased.
3. The deceased was sitting on the front seat of Tata Sumo besides the driver and he suffered fracture in both legs and left hand as well as injuries on the head and neck. The deceased suffered 74% disability due to the injuries suffered by him in the accident which resulted in his death on 31st October, 2006.
4. The deceased initially filed the claim petition for compensation in respect of injuries suffered by him. However, after his death, the deceased was substituted by his wife, three minor children and father who amended the claim petition and claimed the compensation for the injuries suffered by the deceased as well as the compensation arising out of the death of the deceased.
5. The offending vehicle was owned by Air Force and the claim petition was filed against the driver and Air Force as the owner of the offending vehicle.
6. Separate written statements were filed by the driver and owner of the offending vehicle before the learned Tribunal.
7. The driver of the offending vehicle admitted the accident. However, the driver denied that the accident occurred due to his rash and negligent driving. It was submitted by the driver in the written statement that he changed the vehicle lane due to blockage of road at different places. It was further submitted that the Tata Sumo was being driven rashly and negligently at a very high speed and the accident occurred due to the rash and negligent driving of Tata Sumo.
8. In the separate written statement, the Air Force also admitted that their driver changed the lane and came on the wrong side of the road due to the blockage of road at three different places. It was further submitted that the driver had no other alternative but to come on the wrong side of the road due to blockage of the road and the same was done by other vehicles plying on the road. The relevant portion of para-1 of the reply on merits is reproduced hereunder:-
9. The deceased appeared in the witness box as PW-1 and deposed that he and his family were going from Delhi to Shani Dev Mandir, Kokla by Tata Sumo bearing No.HR-26H-2105 and when they reached Palwal, a military truck bearing BA No.89D 84861 came from front side at a high speed in a rash and negligent manner and hit the Tata Sumo due to which the deceased and his mother received injuries. PW-1 further deposed that he became unconscious after the accident and was taken in an ambulance to General Hospital where he regained consciousness and Police recorded his statement. PW-1 was thereafter referred to St. Stephen‟s Hospital, Delhi on the same day. The witness suffered fracture in both legs and left hand and both the bones of the thigh were broken apart from injuries on neck and head. PW-1 remained hospitalized in private ward for 1½ months and stated to have incurred Rs.5,00,000/- on his treatment, conveyance and special diet. PW1 was confined to bed and one attendant remained with him whole day. PW1 proved the treatment record - Ex.PW1/F to Ex.PW1/Z and Ex.PW1/A1 to Ex.PW1/44. PW1 also proved the certified copies of the criminal record Ex.PW1/A to Ex.PW1/E. PW1 proved the documents relating to the treatment and the bills for purchase of medicines as Ex.P-1 to Ex.P-36.
10. In cross-examination, PW-1 was asked as to how many persons were travelling in Tata Sumo to which PW-1 replied that 6-7 persons, namely, the deceased, his mother, wife, two daughters and son were travelling in the vehicle and the deceased was sitting on the front seat. The witness denied that there was a traffic block on the other side of the road and the entire traffic was diverted on the right side. PW-1 further stated in cross-examination that the speed of Tata Sumo was about 20 kms per hour at the time of the accident. The witness was also cross-examined about his health, occupation and income.
11. The witness from St. Stephen‟s Hospital appeared as PW-2 and proved the treatment record - Ex.PW2/1 to Ex.PW2/5. The witness also proved the attested copies of medical bills as Ex.PW2/6 collectively. PW-2 also deposed that the deceased was admitted in the St. Stephen‟s Hospital five times. PW-2 was not at all cross-examined by the appellants despite opportunity given.
12. The appellants produced four witnesses. The driver of the offending vehicle appeared as R1W1 and admitted that he changed the vehicle lane due to blockage of the road at three different places as he did not have any other alternative. R1W1 further admitted that he was following other vehicles which were using the wrong path due to blockage. Paras 3 and 4 of the examination-in-chief of R1W1 are reproduced hereunder:-
13. The Sqn. Ldr., V.G. Nadkarni appeared as R2W1 and also admitted that the driver, Ashok Kumar changed the lane of his vehicle due to blockage of the road and was following other vehicles which were also using alternative path at the relevant time due to blockage. R2W1 placed on record the copy of the Departmental Inquiry Proceedings - Ex.R2W1/1. This witness also imputed the negligence to the driver of Tata Sumo. Para 6 and 7 of the affidavit of R2W1 are relevant and are reproduced hereunder:-

In cross-examination, R2W1 admitted that he had no personal knowledge of the facts of the case and came to know of the facts only on the perusal of the file of the investigation. R2W1 further admitted that the deceased was not joined in the departmental enquiry conducted by Air Force.
14. Umed Singh appeared as R2W2. R2W2 was escorting the offending vehicle at the time of the accident. R2W2 admitted that the offending vehicle came on wrong side of the road as other vehicles were also using alternative path due to blockage and the offending vehicle was following the other vehicles on a very normal speed. R2W2 also imputed the negligence on the Tata Sumo. Para 3 of the affidavit of R2W2 is reproduced hereunder:-
15. Subedar Nathi Ram appeared in the witness box as R2W3 and deposed that a wheat loaded truck was lying in front of his mill due to which the transport was diverted from Palwal Road to Mathura Road and the vehicles were using the alternative road due to blockage of road. In cross-examination, R2W3 admitted that he did not witness the accident and he went to the accident site after receiving the information. R2W3 did not go to the Police Station and was not examined by the Police.
16. The learned Tribunal held that the accident in question occurred due to the rash and negligent driving of the Air Force vehicle by its driver.
17. The learned counsel for the appellant has challenged the finding of the rash and negligent driving of the offending vehicle by its driver and has submitted that the accident occurred due to the rash and negligent driving of Tata Sumo in which the deceased was travelling. There is no challenge to the quantum of compensation computed by the learned Tribunal. The respondents have filed counter claim to seek the enhancement of the award amount.
18. The learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that there was a convoy of three vehicles of Air Force and there was obstruction on the national highway near Palwal at three places due to which the road was blocked and, therefore, the convoy came on the wrong side of the road as there were other vehicles also which had come on the wrong side of the road. There was a road divider and two vehicles of the convoy came on the correct side of the road after travelling about 1/2 km on the wrong side but the third vehicle of the convoy met with an accident with a Tata Sumo. The learned counsel for the appellant further submits that the Tata Sumo was overtaking two other vehicles and in the process met with an accident with the Air Force convoy.
19. The offending Air Force truck was on the wrong side of the road at the time of the accident which is admitted by the driver of the Air Force truck in his written statement as well as in his testimony as R1W1. The blockade of road on the correct side and other vehicles having come on the wrong side of the road is no justification for coming on the wrong side of the road. Merely because there was blockade on the correct side and other vehicles had come to wrong side of the road, the driver of the Air Force truck did not have the right to come on the wrong side of the road. Admittedly, there was no traffic policeman on the site who diverted the traffic on the wrong side. The driver of the Air Force truck neither put on the head lights/emergency lights nor blew the horn so as to give an indication to the traffic coming from the opposite direction. The driver of the Air Force truck was clearly rash and negligent. The finding of rash and negligence of the Air Force truck is, therefore, upheld.
20. The second contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that the driver of the Air Force vehicle was performing the sovereign function and, therefore, Air Force is not liable on the ground of sovereign immunity. The learned counsel refers to and relies upon the following judgments in support of the plea of doctrine of sovereign immunity:-
21. The learned counsel for the claimants submit that:-
22. Mr. V.P. Choudhary, Senior Advocate as amicus curiae and counsel for the claimants submits that the doctrine of sovereign immunity pleaded by the appellant is not applicable to the claim for compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Mr. Choudhary submits that the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is a special law to govern the payment of compensation to the victims of the road accidents and it covers the vehicles owned by the Central Government used for defence purposes and no exception has been carved out in the law with respect to the tortuous liability arising out of the use of the government vehicle for defence purposes. Mr. Choudhary has referred to the following provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in the regard:-
(i) Section 2(30) defines the "owner" of a motor vehicle and it includes all vehicles including the vehicles owned by the Air Force.
(ii) Section 2(20) defines the "licencing authority" and Section 2(37) defines the "registering authority", which are empowered to register and issue licences even in respect of Air Force vehicles.
(iii) Section 18 provides that the authority prescribed by the Central Government may issue driving licence to drive motor vehicles which are under the exclusive control of the Central Government and are used for government purposes relating to the defence of the country and unconnected with any commercial enterprise.

(iv) Section 60 provides for registration of vehicles belonging to the Central Government and used for defence of the country.

(v) Section 140(1) provides for payment of compensation on the principle of no fault liability on the owner of the motor vehicle.
(vi) Section 144 provides that the provisions of Chapter X shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of the Motor Vehicles Act or any other law for the time being in force.
(vii) Section 146(2)&(3) provides that the Government may exempt the requirement of compulsory insurance in respect of Government vehicle provided that the fund is established and maintained for meeting any law arising out of the use of the government vehicle.
(viii) Section 165 provides for constitution of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal for the purpose of adjudicating the claims for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death or bodily injury to persons arising out of the use of motor vehicles.
(ix) Section 168 provides the payment of the compensation by the insurer or owner or driver of the offending vehicle involved in the accident.
23. The learned amicus curiae and the counsel for the claimants have referred to and relied upon the following judgments:-
24. Considering the important question of law involved in this case, Mr. Parag Tripathi, learned ASG was requested to examine the plea of sovereign immunity set up by the appellants and assist this Court. Mr. Parag Tripathi, appeared before this Court on 10th July, 2009 and submitted that the doctrine of sovereign immunity which is based on the maxim that „King can do no wrong‟ has no place in Indian jurisprudence. Mr. Tripathi has made submissions on the law relating to sovereign immunity in India as well as in England, United States, Australia, Canada, Singapore, South Africa and Pakistan. Mr. Tripathi, learned ASG has referred to the following judgments:-
25. The doctrine of sovereign immunity was considered by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Rajasthan vs. Vidhyawati (supra). In that case, the driver of a Government jeep knocked down a pedestrian which resulted in his death. The legal representatives of the deceased sued the Government of Rajasthan and the driver for compensation for the tortious act of the driver. The suit was decreed by the Trial Court and upheld by the High Court in appeal. The State of Rajasthan filed the appeal before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court on the ground that it is not liable for the tortious act of its employees. The appeal was dismissed. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that the rule of immunity in favour of Crown based on common law in the United Kingdom has disappeared from the land of its birth and it has no validity in our country after the Constitution. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court further held that Article 300 of the Constitution has saved the right of Parliament to enact such law but no law has been enacted till now. The findings of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court are as under:-
26. The doctrine of sovereign immunity again came up for consideration before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of Pushpa Thakur vs. Union of India (supra). In that case, the army truck rammed into another vehicle resulting in fracture of both legs and amputation of right leg of the victim. The driver of the military truck was found to be negligent. The principle of sovereign immunity of the State was rejected by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that the principle of sovereign immunity of State for the acts of its servants has no application in such cases and Union of India is clearly liable to pay compensation to the victims for negligence of the driver of the military truck. It was held as under:-
27. In the case of Saheli, a Women's Resources Centre vs. Commissioner of Police (supra), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court following the judgment of State of Rajasthan vs. Vidhyawati (supra) held that the State was responsible for the tortious acts of its employees.
28. The doctrine of sovereign immunity again came up for consideration before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of N. Nagendra Rao and Co. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh (supra) where the Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that the doctrine of sovereign immunity has no relevance in the present day context. The findings of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court are as under:-
29. In the case of Common Cause, a Registered Society vs. UOI (supra), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that no civilized system can permit an executive to play with the people of its country and claim that it is entitled to act in any manner as it is sovereign. The findings of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court are as under:-
30. In the case of State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Challa Ramkrishna Reddy (supra), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that the principle of sovereign immunity has no place in Indian jurisprudence where the power vests in the people who elect the representatives to run the Government which has to act in accordance with provisions of the Constitution and would be answerable to the people. It was held as under:-
31. Apart from the Hon‟ble Supreme Court judgments, there have been number of High Court judgments where the High Court discarded the doctrine of sovereign immunity in the cases of road accidents following the aforesaid judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. The judgments are as under:-
32. The appellants have relied upon the judgment of Secretary of State vs. A. Cockcraft (supra) which relates to pre- constitutional era based on outdated notion that the „King can do no wrong‟. This judgment does not hold good after the judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the cases of State of Rajasthan vs. Vidhyawati (supra), Pushpa Thakur vs. Union of India (Supra) and other judgments. The appellants have next referred to the judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of Kasturilal Ralia Ram Jain vs. State of Uttar Pradesh (supra) which has been considered but not followed by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in several cases. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Challa Ramkonda Reddy (supra) held that the maxim „King can do no wrong‟ has no place in Indian jurisprudence where the power vests not in the crown but in the people who elect their representatives to run the Government which has to act in accordance to the Constitution and is answerable to the people for violation thereof. It was further held that in the process of judicial advancement, Kasturi Lal's case has paled into insignificance and is no longer of any binding value. In another case of Common Cause, a Registered Society vs. UOI (supra), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that no civilized system can permit an executive to play with the people of its country and claim that it is entitled to act in any manner as it is sovereign. The findings of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court are as under:-

The judgment of N. Nagendra Rao and Co. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh (supra) does not support the appellant. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court has taken note of the decision of Supreme Court in Pushpa Thakur case (supra) in para 13 of the said judgment while noting that the field of operation of the principle of sovereign immunity has been substantially whittled down by the subsequent decisions of the apex Court and observed as under:-


The appellants have also referred to and relied upon the the judgment of Bakshi Amrik Singh vs. Union of India (supra) which has been overruled by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of Pushpa Thakur vs. Union of India (supra). The judgments of Thangarajan vs. Union of India (supra) and Shakuntala vs. Union of India (supra) referred to by the appellants also do not hold good in view of the judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Pushpa Thakur's case.
33. The law with respect to the doctrine of sovereign immunity is clear and well settled and the following principles of law emerge from the judgments of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court:-
(I) The rule of immunity in favour of Crown based on common law in the United Kingdom has disappeared from the land of its birth and it has no validity in our country after the Constitution. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has further held that Article 300 of the Constitution has saved the right of Parliament to enact such law but no law has been enacted till now.
jurisprudence where the power vests, not in the Crown, but in the Government, which has to act in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and would be answerable to the people for any violation thereof.
non-sovereign acts and like ordinary citizen, the State would be liable for the act done by its employees.

(IV) The plea that the driver was on sovereign duty is not open to the Govt. vis-à-vis its citizens especially in a welfare State.

(V) Even in advanced countries like England, United States and Australia the trend and tendency is to whittle down the rigour of sovereign immunity and pave a smooth and sailing way for laying actions against the Government for torts suffered or injuries caused to the citizens at the behest of the governmental machinery by means otherwise than through procedure established by law.
(VI) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Pushpa Thakur v. Union, 1984 ACJ 559, has held that the doctrine of sovereign immunity has no application so far as claims for compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act are concerned.
the torturous liability arising out of use of Government vehicle performing sovereign functions. Reference in this regard may be made to Section 2(20)(30)(37), 18, 60, 140(1), 144, 146(2) & (3), 165 and 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Whether the State is bound by the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act is no longer res integra.
(VIII) It does not behove the State to seek cover under the plea of sovereign immunity merely to avoid liability for the consequences of the negligence of its servants. Such a plea is wholly out of place in a welfare State, in a case like the present where instead of providing for the needy, left so by the acts of its servants in the course of their employment, the attempt is to look for immunity founded upon the dubious privilege of the injured or the deceased, as the case may be, being run over by a vehicle engaged in the discharge of the sovereign functions of the State.

(IX) The law has marched ahead like a Pegasus but the Government attitude continues to be conservative and it tries to defend its action or the tortious action of its officers by raising the plea of immunity for sovereign acts or acts of State.
34. If the Executive does not follow the certain well settled law laid down by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, it shall create confusion in the administration of justice and undermine the law laid down by the Apex Court and shall impair the constitutional authority of the Apex Court. The disobedience of the law laid down by the Court shall also amount to contempt of Court. Reference in this regard may be made to the following two judgments:-
(i) Baradakanta Mishra Ex-Commissioner of Endowments Vs. Bhimsen Dixit, (1973) 1 SCC 446:
In this case, the appellant, a member of Judicial Service of State of Orissa refused to follow the decision of the High Court. The High Court issued a notice of contempt to the appellant and thereafter held him guilty of contempt which was challenged before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court held as under:-
The Gujarat High Court held the Secretary, Labour and Social Welfare and Tribal Development Department, to be guilty of contempt for refusing to follow the law laid down by the High Court. It was held as under:-
37. Notice be issued to the learned Attorney General through Mr. Atul Nanda, Standing Counsel of Union of India to assist this Court either personally or by giving necessary instructions.
38. List for the response to the notice on 4th December, 2009.
39. Copy of this order be given „Dasti‟ to learned counsel for the parties as well as to the Standing Counsel of Union of India under signature of Court Master.

J.R. MIDHA, J NOVEMBER 12, 2009 aj