Delhi District Court
In The Court Of Sh. Balwinder Singh vs Unknown on 31 May, 2014
Author: Ms. Balwinder Singh
1. Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the present challan filed by the prosecution under Sections DMVR 11.8/177, 11.9/177 & 66/192A of Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as M.V. Act). The brief facts of the case as per prosecution are that on 25.05.2013 at about 17:45 p.m. the accused Kallu, S/o Sh. Sukhram was driving one vehicle (TSR) bearing No.DL­1RE­5743 at Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 1 of 21 Saket Metro Station. It is the case of the prosecution that the accused refused to carry one passenger namely Saurav, S/o Sh. Narender Chand, R/o House No.45, Saidullajab, Delhi to South Extension as per the electronic fare metre reading of his vehicle. Therefore, the challaning officer issued the present challan bearing No.104314 which is Ex.PW­1/A against the accused under DMVR 11.8/177, 11.9/177 & 66/192A of M.V. Act i.e. for refusal to carry a passenger as per electronic fare metre reading of the vehicle and for violation of permit conditions on that account.

2. Since the offences were bailable, the accused/driver is admitted to bail on furnishing of personal bond and surety bond in a sum of Rs.10,000/­.
3. Notice of accusation was served upon the accused/driver U/s 251 CrPC to which the accused/driver pleaded not guilty and claimed trial and the matter was fixed for PE.

4. In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined two witnesses namely PW1 SI Bhagirath, No.D1164 and PW2 Complainant/passenger Saurav and also proved the challan which is Ex.PW­1/A.
PW1 SI Bhagirath in his examination­in­chief deposed that on the day of incident i.e. 25.05.2013 he was posted on duty at Traffic circle Mehrauli and was discharging his duties at Saket Metro Station. At about 17:45 p.m. PW2 the complainant passenger namely Sh. Saurav approached him and told him that the driver of one auto rickshaw who was standing near Saket Metro Station has refused to take him to South Extension. Thereafter, PW1 went to that auto rickshaw alongwith PW2. PW1 further deposed that the accused driver present in Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 2 of 21 the court was the same person who was present inside the offending vehicle on the day of incident. PW1 asked the accused driver as to why he has refused to take the passenger Sh. Saurav to which accused driver replied that he does not go to South Extension and, therefore, he refused to take the said passenger. Thereafter, PW1 inspected the documents of the vehicle and issued the present challan which is Ex.PW­1/A bearing his signature at point A against the accused driver.
In his cross examination, PW1 deposed that he was standing at a distance of about 50 yards from the place where the auto rickshaws were standing near Saket Metro Station and he came to know about the incident when PW2 the complainant passenger Saurav told him about the refusal by the accused driver. As per PW2, the complainant was alone and his name was also mentioned by him as a witness in the challan and the challan also bears his signature. PW2 negated the suggestion of Ld. Defence Counsel that it was the passenger who insisted that he will not go by electronic fare metre reading of the vehicle and due to which the accused driver refused to carry him.
In examination­in­chief of PW2 Sh. Saurav (complainant passenger) deposed that around 6­7 months back, one day in the evening he alongwith his wife planned to visit South Extension for shopping purpose. They reached near Saket Metro Station and approached one auto rickshaw. However, PW2 deposed that he could not remember the registration number of the said vehicle at that moment. As per PW2 he asked the driver of the said auto rickshaw that whether he will go to South Extension­2. However, the driver of the said auto rickshaw demanded Rs.180/­ for the same. PW2 asked him to charge reasonable fare but he did not agree for the same. In the meantime, two traffic police officials reached at that place and asked PW2 whether the driver of the said auto rickshaw has refused to carry them. PW2 further deposed that he told the traffic officials Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 3 of 21 that the accused driver is demanding Rs.180/­ which is very unreasonable. Thereafter, traffic officials went to the nearby police gate box alongwith PW2 and the accused driver and there they issued the present challan against the accused driver which is Ex.PW­/1A and it also bears the signature of PW2 as a witness at point Y.
In his cross­examination, PW­2 deposed that though he is is unable to identify the accused driver, however, it is correct that the driver of the offending vehicle had refused to drop us to South Extension­II and demanded Rs.160/­ for the same. There was only one person present inside the vehicle at that time and he demanded that money. In the end, PW2 negated the suggestion of Ld. Defence Counsel that he is deposing falsely in the present case.
5. After the examination and cross examination of both PW­1 & PW­2, PE was closed.

6. After the PE was closed, the statement of accused driver U/s 313 CrPC was recorded. During the examination of accused U/s 313 CrPC, the entire incriminating evidence appearing against the accused was put to him and he was given an opportunity to explain the incriminating evidence appearing against him to which he submitted that he accepts the fact that on the day of incident, he was driving his vehicle at Saket Metro Station at about 17:45 p.m. However, he denied that he was present inside the vehicle or demanded any money from the complainant passenger. However, he admitted this fact that the challaning officer approached him on the complaint of the complainant passenger Sh. Saurav and issued the present challan which is Ex.PW­1/A.
Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 4 of 21
7. After examination of accused/driver U/s 313 CrPC, he submitted that he does not wish to lead Defence Evidence and the matter was fixed for final arguments.

8. I have heard Ld. APP for the State as well as Ld. Defence Counsel at length and have carefully gone through the entire record and evidence and after carefully perusing the same, I am giving my finding as per below:
In the present challan, the accused was challaned for the violations of Section DMVR 11.8/177, 11.9/177 & 66/192A of M.V. Act,1988.
(a) Sec. 66 of The Motor Vehicle Act , 1988 provides that:
Necessity for permits - (1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used:
Provided that a stage carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a contract carriage:
Provided further that a stage carriage permit may subject to any conditions that may be specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a goods carriage either when carrying passengers or not:
Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall, subject to Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 5 of 21 any conditions that may be specified in the permit, authorise the holder to use the vehicle for the carriage of goods for on in connection with a trade or business carried on by him.
(2) The Holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle, for the drawing of any trailer or semi­trailer not owned by him, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:
[Provided that the holder of a permit of any articulated vehicle may use the prime­mover of that articulated vehicle for any other semi­trailor] (3) The provisions of sub­section (1) shall not apply ­
(a) to any transport vehicle owned by the Central Government or a State Government and used for Government purposes unconnected with any commercial enterprise;
(b) to any transport vehicle owned by a local authority or by a person acting under contract with a local authority and used solely for road cleansing, road watering or conservancy purposes;
(c) to any transport vehicle used solely for police, fire brigade or ambulance purposes;
(d) to any transport vehicle used solely for the conveyance of corpses and the mourners accompanying the corpses;
(e) to any transport vehicle used for towing a disabled vehicle or for removing goods from a disabled vehicle to a place of safety;

Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 6 of 21
(f) to any transport vehicle used for any other public purpose as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf;
(g) to any transport vehicle used by person who manufactures or deals in motor vehicles or builds bodies for attachment to chassis, solely for such purposes and in accordance with such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(i) to any goods vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of which does not exceed 3,000 kilograms;
(j) subject to such conditions as the Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, specify to any transport vehicle purchased in one State and proceeding to a place, situated in that Sate or in any other State, without carrying any passenger or goods;
(k) to any transport vehicle which has been temporarily registered under section 43 while proceeding empty to any place for the purpose of registration of the vehicle.
(m) to any transport vehicle which, owing to flood, earthquake or any other natural calamity, obstruction on road or unforeseen circumstances, is required to be diverted through any other route, whether within or outside the State, with a view to Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 7 of 21 enabling it to reach its destination;
(n) to any transport vehicle used for such purposes as the Central or State Government may, by order, specify;
(o) to any transport vehicle which is subject to a hire­ purchase, lease or hypothecation agreement and which owing to the default of the owner has been taken possession of by or on behalf of the person with whom the owner has entered into such agreement, to enable such motor vehicle to reach its destination; or
(p) to any transport vehicle while proceeding empty to any place for purpose of repair.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub­section (3), sub­ section (1) shall, if the State Government by rule made under section 96 so prescribes apply to any motor vehicle adapted to carry more than nine person excluding the driver.
The penalty for violation of Section 66 of M.V. Act is provided in Section 192A.
Sec.192A of The Motor Vehicle Act,1988 provides that : Using vehicle without permit - (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of sub­section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the prupsoe for which the vehicle may be used Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 8 of 21 shall be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less than three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that the court may for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injury or for the transport of materials for repair or for the transport of food or materials to relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose:
Provided that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority within seven days from the date of such use.
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature specified in sub­section (1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made.
It is also important to go through some other important provisions for the better understanding of violation of provisions of Motor Vehicle Act as alleged to be committed by the accused. Therefore, we must understand the meaning of permit, contract carriage permit as well as stage carriage permit, a motor vehicle, a Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 9 of 21 transport vehicle and fares.
Section 2(31) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Permit"
"Permit" means a permit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority prescribed in this behalf under this Act authorizing the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle;
Section 2(7) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Contract carriage"
"Contract carriage" means a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passengers for hire or reward and is engaged under a contract, whether expressed or implied for the use of such vehicle as a whole for the carriage of passengers mentioned therein and entered into by a person with a holder of a permit in relation to such vehicle or any person authorised by him in this behalf on a fixed or an agreed rate or sum ­
(a) on a time basis, whether or not with reference to any route or distance; or
(b) from one point to another, and in either case, without stopping to pick up or set down passengers not included in the contract anywhere during the journey, and includes ­
(i) a maxicab; and
(ii) a motor cab notwithstanding that separate fares are charged for its passengers;

Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 10 of 21 Section 2(28) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Motor Vehicle"
"Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a trailer; but does not include a vehicle running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any other enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of not exceeding [twenty­five cubic centimetres] Section 2(47) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Transport Vehicle"
"Transport vehicle" means a public service vehicle, a good carriage, an educational institute bus or a private service vehicle.
Section 2(12) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Fares"
"Fares" includes sums payable for a season ticket or in respect of the hire of a contract carriage.
Rule 11(8) & (9) of DMVR provides that :
Duties, functions and conduct of Transport Vehicle Drivers and Conductors­ The driver and conductor of a transport vehicle:
(i) shall, as far as may be reasonably possible having regard to his duties, be responsible for the due observance of the provisions of Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 11 of 21 the Act and of these rules and of the conditions of the permit relating to the vehicle;
(ii) shall not smoke in or on a vehicle during a journey or when it has passengers on board and shall not be, while on duty, under the influence of drink or drug;
(iii) shall behave in a civil and orderly manner to passengers and intending passengers;
(iv) shall be cleanly dressed in such a manner as State Transport Authority any specify;
(v) shall maintain the vehicle in a clean and sanitary condition;
(vi) shall not interfere with persons mounting or preparing to mount upon any other vehicle.
(vii) shall not allow any person to be carried in any public service vehicle in excess of the seating capacity specified in the certificate of registration of the vehicle and any additional number permitted under the terms of the permit to be carried standing in the vehicle;
(viii) shall not willfully deceive or refuse to inform any passenger or intending passenger as to the destination or route of the vehicle or as to the fare for any journey;
(ix) shall not, save for good and sufficient reason, refuse to carry any person, (expect those suffering from contagious diseases as given in Rule 5.19) tending the legal fare;
(x) shall, where goods are carried on the vehicle in addition to the passengers, take all reasonable precautions to endure that passengers are not endangered or unduly inconvenienced by the presence of the goods.

Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 12 of 21
(xi) shall not, save for good and sufficient reasons, require any person who has the legal fare to alight from the vehicle before the conclusion of the journey ;
(xii)shall not loiter or unduly delay upon any journey but shall proceed to his destination as near as may be in accordance with the time table pertaining to the vehicle or where there is no such time table, with all reason­dispatch;
(xiii) shall, in the event of stage carriage being unable to proceed to its destination on account of mechanical breakdown or other cause beyond the control of the driver or the conductor, arrange to convey the passengers to their destination in some other similar vehicle, or, if unable to do so within a period of half an hour after the failure of the vehicle shall on demand refund to each passenger a proper proportion of the fare relating to the completion of the journey for which the passenger has paid the fare;
(xiv) shall not, in the case of stage carriage cause or allow any thing to be placed in the vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct the entry or exit of passengers;
(xv) shall station himself at the parking places provided within the premises of the aerodrome or railway station and shall not approach any person for the purpose of getting his vehicle hired; (xvi)shall not act as a guide to any person or tout to any shopkeeper;
(xvii)shall carry Government servant in connection with enforcement of the provisions of the Act and these rules as specified by the State Transport Authority without charging any Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 13 of 21 fare;
(xviii)shall, in the event of a motor cab fitted with a taxi meter, not set in motion before it is hired and shall stop it immediately when the hirer has noted the reading and hiring charge are paid; Note. ­ A cab shall be considered to be hired form the time it has been engaged or if called from a distance from the time of such call.
(xix)shall, in the event of a motor cab fitted with a taxi meter which is hired by any person being unable to proceed owing to any defect in the mechanism of the tyres of the cab, at once lower the flag to "stopped " or "Break down" and shall not restart his meter until such time the defect is remedied;
(xx) shall not cover or obscure the face of a taxi meter under any circumstances, or at any time and shall not without reasonable excuse, refuse to let the cab for hire when the flag is in a vertical position;
(xxi) shall, on demand by any police officer in uniform or any officer of the Transport Department in uniform, or any member of the State Transport Authority, produce his licence or badge for inspection;
(xxii) shall not allow any body to sit at the bonnet of the vehicle; (xxiii) shall not allow anybody to sit along with him at the driver's seat.

The penalty for the violation of rule 11.8 & 11.9 of DMVR is provided under sec. 177 of the Motor vehicle Act.
Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 14 of 21 Section 177 of M.V. Act provides that:
General provision for punishment of offences - Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.
It is pertinent to mention here that the state transport authority has by virtue of powers conferred upon it bye sec. 74 of The Motor Vehicle Act,1988 by Notification no. F.DC(ARU)/TPT/2012/143 dated 8.8.2012 has also laid down that driver of an autorikshaw shall always charge a passenger as per the electronic fare meter reading of the vehicle and any violation of this condition shall be treated as violation of permit condition for contract carriage permit issued for TSR (auto) vehicles.
9. Thus in order to prove the guilt of the accused and to sustain his conviction the prosecution is required to establish beyond reasonable doubt that:
1. The accused refuse to carry the passenger tending legal fare without any good and sufficient reason for the same.
2. The accused refused to carry the passenger as per electronic fare metre reading of the vehicle.
3 . The accused by refusing the passenger to carry to his destination committed violation of permit condition as contained in Section 66.1/192A of M.V. Act.
To prove this, firstly Ld. APP for State has argued before the court Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 15 of 21 that both the prosecution witness namely PW1 SI Bhagirath and PW2 complainant passenger Saurav have proved the challan on record. Both the prosecution witnesses have remained consistent in their testimonies.
However, Ld. counsel for the accused has pointed out that there are many inconsistencies and loopholes in the testimonies of PW1 and PW2 which raise serious doubt as to the veracity of the prosecution story. Firstly, Ld. Counsel for the accused has argued before the court that PW2 complainant passenger Sh. Saurav has not been able to identify the accused in the present case, therefore, the testimony of PW1 remains uncorroborated as to the fact whether it was actually the accused driver who was present inside the offending vehicle on the day of incident and demanded Rs.180/­ as alleged against the accused driver.
Secondly, the Ld. Defence Counsel has argued that as per the testimony of PW1 the complainant was alone when the present challan was chalked out against the accused driver whereas in the testimony of PW2, his wife was also accompanying him on the day of incident. Moreover, as per the testimony of both the prosecution witnesses the place of challan was a public place however, no independent public witness was joined in the present case to provide corroboration to the story of prosecution. It shows that the testimonies of both the prosecution witnesses are not contradictory but are also uncorroborated. Therefore, reliance should not be placed upon the same particularly in view of the statement of accused U/s 313 CrPC where he submitted that he was not present inside the vehicle and did not demand any money from the complainant passenger in the present case. Moreover, he also submitted that the present challan is a false challan. Therefore, the Ld. Defence Counsel has argued that the prosecution has failed to discharge its duty and could not prove it beyond reasonable doubt that the accused committed any violation as alleged against him.
Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 16 of 21 On the other hand, Ld. APP for the State has argued before the court that there is no substance in the argument of Ld. Defence Counsel . The Ld. APP for the State has submitted that PW1 has clearly deposed in the court that it was the same vehicle against which the complaint was made by PW2 complainant passenger Saurav and only on the basis of the said complaint, the present challan was chalked out by the accused driver. It is correct that PW2 could not identify the accused in the court but the reason for that is only since he was deposing in the court after a period of around six months and a person who deposes about an incident after such a long time may sometime fail to identify the accused due to lapse of memory. However, this fact cannot be ignored that PW2 has also verified this fact that the present challan was based upon his complaint only and he has also corroborated the testimony of PW1 to the extent that the driver of the offending vehicle in question refused to carry him to South Extension as per electronic fare metre reading of the vehicle and demanded Rs.180/­ The Ld. APP for the State has further argued before the court that the absence of any independent witness also does not itself throw away the case of prosecution particularly in view of the fact when there is no allegation of any prior enmity or ill will towards the complainant passenger or the challaning officer. It is not a rule of law but only a rule of prudence that public witnesses should be joined in each and every case and the testimony of prosecution witnesses should not be relied upon in their absence and in proper circumstances where the prosecution witnesses are totally consistent with each other and are fully corroborated each other, the conviction can be based upon that testimony even though no public witness was joined in a case.

10. After hearing the submissions of both the Ld. Defence Counsel and Ld.
Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 17 of 21 APP for the State, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the arguments of Ld. Defence Counsel. It is correct that the complainant passenger could not identify the accused driver in the court. However, this fact only is not sufficient for disbelieving the testimony of PW2 particularly in view of the fact that he has clearly deposed in his testimony that the present challan is based upon his complaint which he may to the challaning officer PW1 on the day of incident. Moreover, the accused driver has also admitted any statement U/s 313 CrPC that on the day of incident he was driving the offending vehicle at Saket Metro Station and was approached by challaning officer and he was the same person against whom the challaning officer issued the present challan.
Secondly, the testimonies of both PW1 and PW2 are consistent with respect to the fact that accused driver refused to carry Sh. Saurav as per electronic fare metre reading of the vehicle and demanded Rs.180/­ for the same.
Thirdly, the defence raised by the accused that some other person was present inside his vehicle on the day of incident who might have refused the complainant passenger in his absence is also without any substance as nothing material on record was produced by the accused in that regard.
Fourthly, the submission of Ld. Defence Counsel that in the absence of public witnesses, the testimony of prosecution witnesses should not be relied upon also does not appears to be convincing. Both the prosecution witnesses are totally consistent in their testimony and are fully corroborating each other. Moreover, the court does not find any reason to disbelieve the testimony of either of the prosecution witnesses when there is no allegation of any ill­will or malafide intentions on their part.
Accordingly, the court is of the opinion that the prosecution has discharged its duty and has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 18 of 21 refused to carry the complainant passenger as per electronic fare metre reading of the vehicle and committed violation of the permit conditions for that reason. Accordingly, I convict the accused for all the offences under DMVR 11.8/177, 11.9/177 and 66./192A of M.V. Act.
The accused be heard on quantum of sentence separately. Copy of this judgment be given free of cost to the accused driver. Pronounced in the open court.
Announced in the open court (Balwinder Singh) on 31st day of May, 2014 Metropolitan Magistrate, Traffic, South District, Saket, New Delhi.

Heard on the quantum of sentence. The Ld. APP for the state has argued that the accused has been convicted for the offence of sec DMVR 11.8/177, 11.9/177 & 66/192A Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. All the offences are serious in nature. The act of refusal by auto rickshaw drivers has become a common thing these days and due to which the people suffers unnecessarily. The evil of greed has over powered the auto rickshaw drivers and they do not care about the difficulties of the poor people on road. Therefore, a strict view be taken against the accused driver so that it may also set an example for the other auto rickshaw drivers and may be a deterrence.
On the other hand the Ld. Defence counsel for the accused has stated that accused is a poor person and that this is his first offence. Ld. Defence counsel further submits that accused is the only bread winner of the family and has to support his family. Thus, prayed that a lenient view may be taken.
Taking the financial condition of the accused into consideration and the fact that it is his first offence and that the accused has stand for trial for about a year, the court is of the opinion that the accused must have realised his mistake by now and therefore a lenient view is taken against the accused and, hence, the accused is Vehicle No. : DL­1RE­5743 20 of 21 sentenced to pay a fine of Rs. 100/­ each for violation of DMVR 11.8/177 and 11.9/177 of M.V. Act. Further, for the offence u/sec. 66/192 A of M.V. Act, the accused is sentenced to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/­. Thus, the accused is sentenced to pay a total fine of Rs.2,200/­ and in default of making the aforementioned payment of fine the accused shall undergo simple imprisonment for two days. Fine paid.