Himachal Pradesh High Court
Ravinder Tyagi vs State Of H. P. & & Ors on 6 December, 2022
Bench: Tarlok Singh Chauhan, Virender Singh
The instant petition has been filed for grant of the following reliefs:-
2. According to the petitioner, the R.T.O., Solan, illegally impounded Volvo Bus bearing registration No. HR-38X-1301, even though it had all the requisite documents including All India Tourist Permit that was necessary for plying contract carriage.
Even the taxes as were required before entering the State had been paid. Despite this, the R.T.O., Solan, did not permit the bus of the petitioner to enter Tipra Barrier, Parwanoo, H.P. on 26.10.2021. The petitioner even thereafter on 28.10.2021 served notice to the respondents but of no effect. Hence, the present petition.
3. The respondents have contested the petition on various preliminary submissions wherein it was averred that the respondents had never obstructed the plying of contract carriage buses of the petitioner in the territory of Himachal Pradesh under All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorization or Permit) Rules, 2021.
.
Whereas All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) falls under the definition of Contract Carriage and the petitioner had violated the provisions of Contract Carriage by using his buses as Stage Carriage in contravention of the Motor Vehicle Act/Rules made thereunder.
4. The order We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the material placed on record.
dated 29.10.2021 passed by the Department of Transport whereby the petitioner was directed to stop illegal operation of the contract carriage in the State of H.P., relevant portion whereof reads as under:-
5. As per Section 46 of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, a certificate of registration issued or in force under the Act in respect of a vehicle shall be effective throughout India. As per Section 47 of The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, when a motor vehicle is registered in one State and is used in another State, apply to the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the vehicle is being used, for a period exceeding twelve months, the owner of the vehicle shall, apply to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction the vehicle is being used, within such period and in such form containing such particulars as may be prescribed by the Central Government, for an assignment of a new registration mark by presenting the certificate of registration.
6. It also stipulates certain conditions for application for re- registration. Sub-Section 5 to Section 47 also contemplates payment of such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees per day as may be prescribed under sub-section (7), in lieu of any action that may be taken under section 177 for delay.
.
7. As per Section 66 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, no owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a "Permit" granted or countersigned by a Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorizing him the use of the vehicle in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used.
8. Section 66 reads as under:-
9. The expression "Permit' has been defined under section 2(31) of the Motor Vehicle Act 1988 as follows:-
10. The definition of these expressions in the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 are reproduced below:-
11. The Honourable Supreme Court in State of A.P. and others versus B. Noorulla Khan and another (2004) 6 SCC 194 has brought out a clear distinction between a "contract carriage" and "stage carriage" as defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. In this connection, a reference may be made to under:-
r to paragraph 16 wherein the distinction has been explained as The distinction between a stage carriage permit or a contract carriage permit as envisaged by the Legislature has to be maintained as the two types of permits are intended to meet different requirements.
The contract carriages are for those who want to hire the vehicle collectively or individually for a group or a party for their transport to a destination/destinations. The vehicle has to be hired as a whole for the carriage of passengers mentioned in the contract. There has to be only one contract for carrying the passengers mentioned in the contract from one destination to another. An agent or a group of persons/individuals cannot hire a public service vehicle for going from one place to another with passengers having different purposes. If such a construction is put then there would be no distinction between stage carriage or contract carriage permits. If contract carriage permit holder is permitted to pick up individual or a few of them from the starting point of journey and drop them at the last terminus of the route it would virtually be a Stage Carriage with .
corridor restriction. Stage carriage is intended to meet the requirements of the general public, travelling from one destination to another having different purposes whereas a contract carriage is meant for those who want to hire a public service vehicle as a whole collectively for their transport from one destination to another having the same purpose. High Court was not right in holding that the travelling party as a whole need not have a common purpose for their travel and it was sufficient if they had a common destination. The view taken runs counter to the law laid down by this Court in Brijendra Kumar Chaudhari & Anr. and Nirmala Jagdish Chandra Kabracases (supra) and, therefore, bad in law. High Court was not right in declaring ultra vires the Rules framed by the State Government providing that the party hiring the contract carriage vehicle should, not only, have the intention of traveling to the same destination but should also have the common purpose of travelling as well. In Rule 297-A (1)(c) 'common purpose' has been defined to mean the intention shared alike by all the persons travelling by the public service vehicles to attend a meeting, gathering or function, social, religious, political and the like, or to go to a pligrimage or visit to place of tourist's interest or both. That it would not include the intention or the act of such persons merely travelling from one common point to another. This Rule framed by the State Government does not run counter to the provisions of Section 2(7) of the Act either in its .
intent or in its expression. The rule is in consonance with the intent of Section 2(7) of the Act. The same has been framed to fulfill the object with which Section 2(7) has been enacted. Any other interpretation would obliterate the distinction between a stage carriage permit and a contract carriage permit.
"authorization" issued to the petitioner under All India Tourist r and Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) Rules, 2021.
13. The All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) Rules, 2021 was framed under the power vested with the Central Government under Section 88 and Section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in suppression of Motor Vehicles (All India Permit For Tourist Transport Operators) Rules, 1983.
14. The expression "Authorisation" and "Permit" is used in Rule 3 of All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) Rules 2021. It reads as under:
15. To avail the benefit of the above Rule, the petitioner's bus should be "tourist vehicle" and the petitioner should be a "tourist vehicle" operator. Rule 4(4) of All India Tourist Vehicle (Authorization or Permit) Rules 2021 deals with the procedure for grant of Authorisation" or "Permit" and renewal thereof:-
16. The aforesaid rule also prescribes the fee for issuance of "Authorisation" or "Permit". It reads as under:-
17. Rule 2 (b) and (d) of the All India Tourist Vehicles .
(Authorisation or Permit) Rules, 2021 define these expressions "Authorisation" and Permit as follows:-
18. Thus, petitioner should have used the bus as a "Contract Carriage," to avail the benefit of All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) Rule 2021.
19. The "Permit" and "Authorisation" referred to in the All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) Rules, 2021 applies only to the "Tourist Vehicles" as defined in Section 2(43) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. as is evident from a reading of Rule 3 of the aforesaid Rules.
20. As per Rule 6 of the All India Tourist vehicle (Authorization or Permit) Rules 2021, the fee paid towards authorization or permit as the case may be shall be remitted on a monthly basis to the jurisdictional state. The permit fee .
collected under rule 5 is to be distributed among the States and Union Territories. Rule 16 of the All India Tourist vehicle (Authorization or permit) Rules 2021 deals with exemption with which this court is not concerned.
21. The usage of the vehicle, whether as a "Contract
22.
r to Carriage" and "Stage Carriage" is one of fact. It cannot be determined by this Court.
When the bus of the petitioner was impounded, as a matter of fact, it was though registered as a Contract Carriage but the same was being regularly plied as a Stage Carriage in the State of Himachal Pradesh. If the vehicle was used by the petitioner as a Stage Carriage in the State of Himachal Pradesh, then there was no question of the concession of the authorization or permit issued by the Government of Haryana to the petitioner under the provisions of All India Tourist Vehicles (Authorisation or Permit) Rules, 2021.
23. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we have no hesitation to conclude that the petitioner, who has tourist vehicle can use it only as Contract Carriage and not as Stage Carriage.
Thus, there is no illegality or arbitrariness in the action taken by the respondents either impounding the vehicle of the petitioner or a passing the order dated 20.10.2021, thereby the petitioner was directed immediately to stop illegal operation of the bus as .
Stage Carriage.
24. Accordingly, we find no merit in this petition and the same is accordingly dismissed, so also pending applications, if any.