Delhi High Court
Ritu Minor Thr. Her Father & Ors. vs Regional Manager Uttranchal ... on 7 December, 2012
Author: J.R. Midha
1. The appellant has challenged the award of the Claims Tribunal whereby compensation of `15,13,000/- has been awarded to the appellant. The appellant seeks enhancement of the award amount.
2. The accident dated 30th July, 1999 resulted in grievous injuries to the appellant. The appellant was six years old at the time of the accident. She was going with her parents from Delhi to Almora by bus. The bus stopped at Garam Pani bus stand and all the passengers including the appellant got down. The appellant was standing on the left side of the road when U.P. State Roadways bus bearing UP-02C 6824 came from behind and crushed the appellant under its left wheel. The appellant was dragged for a distance of about 10 feet. The right leg and a part of the left leg of the appellant were completely crushed under the wheel of the offending bus. The appellant also suffered multiple injuries to spinal cord at the level of 6th thoracic vertebra. The injuries suffered by the appellant and the treatment taken by her are summarized as under:-
(i) The appellant was initially taken to Civil Hospital, Ranikhet who referred her to S.S.J. Base Hospital, Haldwani where she was referred to Delhi. She was admitted in Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital where she remained till 4th October, 1999. She was treated for degloving injury of right leg with 90% skin loss and wounds in lower abdominal area (Ex.PW2/1).
(ii) The appellant was underwent skin grafting and plastic surgery (Ex.PW2/3). The appellant was also treated for bowel and bladder injuries (Ex.PW2/4 and Ex.PW2/5). The appellant was also taken to GMR Institute of Imaging and Research for T-2 Hyper-intensity in the dorsal cord from D-6 to D-8 level.
(iii) There was no movement in the limbs of the appellant for which she was taken to G.B. Pant Hospital and then to All India Institute of Medical Sciences on 4th October, 1999 and skin grafting was opined.
(iv) On 10th October, 1999, the appellant was admitted to Virmani Hospital, Mayur Vihar, Phase-II, Delhi where she underwent skin grafting. The appellant was discharged on 19 th October, 1999 (Ex.PW1/2 and Ex.PW1/3). The appellant th underwent further surgeries for skin grafting on 24 October, 1999 and 30th October, 1999 at New Life Hospital.
(v) On 6th December, 1999, the appellant took treatment for traumatic paraplegia with bed sore, degloving injury on left leg and incontinency with bladder and bowel (Ex.PW4/C-1 to C-3).
(vi) On 18th December, 1999, the appellant consulted Dr. L.K. Malhotra, Neurologist who observed that the appellant suffered complete sensory loss below T-4 level (Ex.PW1/6-8).
(vii) From 27th November, 1999 to 25th August, 2001, the appellant took treatment from G.B. Pant Hospital where she was given physiotherapy and occupational therapy along with treatment for post traumatic transverse mylopathy (Ex.PW5/A to Ex.PW5/D).
(viii) From 3rd October, 2001 to 27th December, 2001, the appellant took treatment from Hindu Rao Hospital where she again underwent physiotherapy exercise.
3. The injuries suffered by the appellant resulted in permanent disability. The appellant was examined by the Medical Board of Lok Nayak Hospital. Vide disability certificate dated 11th October, 2003 (Ex.PW6/1), the Medical Board certified the permanent disability of the appellant to be 80% due to Post Traumatic Mylopathy (level T-6) with complete paraplegia (power grade-0) with dense sensory loss and bladder and bowel involvement with B/L ankle and right knee contracture. The Board opined that the appellant would require lifelong nursing care.
4. The injuries suffered by the appellant and the treatment taken by her were proved by the father of the appellant who appeared in the witness box as PW-3. PW-3 proved the original bills/cash memos - Ex.PW3/1 to Ex.PW3/101. PW-3 incurred the expenditure of `70,000/- on the treatment of the appellant in various hospitals and nursing homes. The medical record in respect of the treatment of the appellant from Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital was proved by PW-2 as Ex.PW2/1 to Ex.PW2/5. The medical record of the appellant in respect of the treatment taken at Virmani Hospital was proved as Ex.PW1/1 to Ex.PW1/14. The medical record in respect of the treatment taken by the appellant at Sant Parmanand Hospital has been proved by PW-4 as Ex.PW4/A1 to Ex.PW4/A-2, Ex.PW4/B and Ex.PW4/C-1 to Ex.PW4/C-3. Dr. Vinod Puri, Professor and Head of Department of Neurology, G.B. Pant Hospital appeared in the witness box as PW-5 and proved the medical record - Ex.PW5/A to Ex.PW5/D. PW-5 also proved the disability certificate - Ex.PW5/A. Dr. Rajiv Kohil, Physician from LNJP Hospital appeared as PW-6 and proved the disability certificate as Ex.PW6/1. PW-6 deposed that the permanent disability of the appellant was 80% as per permanent disability certificate - Ex.PW6/1 with respect to the whole body. PW-6 deposed that the dense sensory loss and bladder/bowel involvement as referred in Ex.PW6/1 was incurable. He further deposed that the injuries suffered by the appellant were likely to affect the longevity of her life. PW-6 further deposed that the disability of 80% could also increase in future and the appellant could also develop many other complications because of the involvement of bladder and bowel.
5. The Claims Tribunal awarded compensation of `15,13,000/- along with interest @6% per annum. The break-up of the aforesaid compensation is as under:-
6. The learned counsel for the appellant has urged the following grounds at the time of hearing of this appeal:-
(i) The compensation for pain and suffering be enhanced.
(ii) The compensation for loss of amenities of life be enhanced.
(iii) The compensation for loss of matrimonial prospects be enhanced.
(iv) The compensation be awarded for disfiguration.
(v) The compensation for conveyance be enhanced.
(vi) The compensation be awarded for loss of earning capacity due to permanent disability.
(vii) The compensation be awarded for future medical expenses.
(viii) The compensation to be awarded for wheelchair, special wheelchair for bathing, special jacket, special commode chair, special undergarments and tuition fee.
(ix) The rate of interest be enhanced.
7. Vide order dated 20th July, 2012, this Court deemed it necessary to record the additional evidence relating to the subsequent events of the treatment taken by the appellant after the award and also to take on record the present condition of the appellant under Order XLI Rule 27(1)(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure. The additional evidence led by the appellant in terms of the above order is as under:-
7.1 The appellant‟s body below chest level is completely paralyzed including the bladder and bowel sphincters due to which there is no sensation below the chest level and the appellant has no control over natural calls. The appellant cannot stand or walk and is confined to bed. However, during day time, she moves on wheelchair.
7.2. At the time of the accident, the appellant was aged 6 years and was studying in nursery class. She somehow continued her education by attending the school on a wheelchair.
7.3. The appellant is presently aged 19 years and is studying in 12th standard. The progress report of the appellant‟s education has been proved as Ex.AW1/1.
7.4. The cost of the wheelchair being used by the appellant is `20,000/-. The life of a wheelchair is about two years and the appellant has changed six wheelchairs which has costed her parents `1,20,000/-. The appellant has been advised to use a motorized wheelchair and also to take a folding wheelchair. The appellant has obtained the estimate of the motorized and the folding wheelchair. The quotation has been placed on record as Ex.AW1/2. The cost of the motorized wheelchair is `1,25,000/- and the cost of the folding wheelchair is `22,000/-. The life of the motorized wheelchair is stated to be two years and the appellant is claiming `12,50,000/- towards the cost of wheelchair for the next 15 years.
7.5. The doctor has advised the appellant to wear a jacket to balance her body on the wheelchair which costs `35,000/- and the durability of jacket is approximately one year.
7.6. The appellant is unable to use normal toilet and seeks special commode chair which costs `5,000/-.
7.7. The appellant has been advised to use in view of her condition special undergarments which costs `500/- each.
7.8. The appellant is taking the tuition to continue her studies which costs `2,000/- per month.
7.9. Since the appellant cannot walk, she has been advised to use special wheelchair (for bathing) which costs `2,000/-.
7.10. The appellant is regularly taking physiotherapy for which a Physiotherapist visits every alternate day. The fee of the Physiotherapist is `500/- per visit.
7.11. Since the appellant is not able to sense the nature call of urination, she frequently suffers infection and requires medical treatment which costs about `25,000/- per year for the next 15 years.
7.12. The appellant is keen to go for higher education for which the attendant is required to accompany her besides the transportation expenses. The appellant claims `4,000/- per month towards attendant charges for the next 15 years.
7.13. The appellant also seeks loss of income due to permanent disability on the basis that she would have earned `15,000/- per month.
8. On 25th May, 2012, the appellant had appeared before this Court and her condition was seen. The appellant was brought on a wheelchair by her parents and she was unable to stand due to post traumatic mylopathy (level T-6) with complete paraplegia (power grade-0) with dense sensory loss, bladder and bowel involvement with B/L ankle and right knee contracture. However, the appellant appeared to be very ambitious to continue her education.
9. Law with respect to Grant of Compensation in Injury cases 9.1. The law with respect to the grant of compensation in injury cases is well-settled. The injured is entitled to pecuniary as well as non-pecuniary damages. Pecuniary damages also known as special damages are generally designed to make good the pecuniary loss which is capable of being calculated in terms of money whereas non-pecuniary damages are incapable of being assessed by arithmetical calculations. The pecuniary or special damages, generally include the expenses incurred by the claimants on his treatment, special diet, conveyance, cost of nursing/attending, loss of income, loss of earning capacity and other material loss, which may require any special treatment or aid to the insured for the rest of his life. The general damages or the non-pecuniary loss include the compensation for mental or physical shock, pain, suffering, loss of amenities of life, disfiguration, loss of marriage prospects, loss of expected or earning of life, inconvenience, hardship, disappointment, frustration, mental stress, dejectment and unhappiness in future life, etc. The above list is not exhaustive and there may be special or additional circumstances depending on the facts in each case.
9.2. In R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) Pvt. Ltd., (1995) 1 SCC 551, a road accident resulted in 100% disability due to paraplegia below waist to a lawyer (retired Judge). The Supreme Court observed that no amount of compensation can restore the physical frame of the appellant. That is why it has been said by Courts that whenever any amount is determined as the compensation payable for any injury suffered during an accident, the object is to compensate such injury "so far as money can compensate" because it is impossible to equate the money with the human sufferings or personal deprivations. Money cannot renew a broken and shattered physical frame. In its very nature whenever a Tribunal or a Court is required to fix the amount of compensation in cases of accident, it involves some guess work, some hypothetical consideration, some amount of sympathy linked with the nature of the disability caused. But all the aforesaid elements have to be viewed with objective standards. When compensation is to be awarded for pain and suffering and loss of amenity of life, the special circumstances of the claimant have to be taken into account including his age, the unusual deprivation he has suffered, the effect thereof on his future life.
9.3. In Common Cause, A Registered Society v. Union of India, (1999) 6 SCC 667, the Supreme Court held that the object of an award of damages is to give the plaintiff compensation for damage, loss or injury he has suffered. The Court further held that the elements of damage recognized by law are divisible into two main groups: pecuniary and non-pecuniary loss. While the pecuniary loss is capable of being arithmetically worked out, the non- pecuniary loss is not so calculable. Non-pecuniary loss is compensated in terms of money, not as a substitute or replacement for other money, but as a substitute, what McGregor says, is generally more important than money: it is the best that a court can do.
9.4. In Nagappa v. Gurudayal Singh, (2003) 2 SCC 274, the Supreme Court held that if a collection of cases on the quantum of damages is to be useful, it must necessarily be classified in such a way that comparable cases can be grouped together. No doubt, no two cases are alike but still, it is possible to make a broad classification which enables one to bring comparable awards together. Inflation should be taken into account while calculating damages.
9.5. In Divisional Controller, KSRTC v. Mahadeva Shetty, (2003) 7 SCC 197, the road accident resulted in paraplegia due to serious injury to the spinal cord. The Supreme Court held that the object of providing compensation is to mitigate the hardship and place the claimant as far as possible in the same position financially as he was before the accident. The quantum of damages fixed should be in accordance with the injury. An injury may bring about many consequences like loss of earning capacity, loss of mental pleasure and many such consequential losses. A person becomes entitled to damages for mental and physical loss, his or her life may have been shortened or that he or she cannot enjoy life, which has been curtailed because of physical handicap. The normal expectation of life is impaired. The compensation awarded has to be "just" and not a bonanza. Every method or mode adopted for assessing compensation has to be considered in the background of "just" compensation which is the pivotal consideration. Though by use of the expression "which appears to it to be just", a wide discretion is vested in the Tribunal, the determination has to be rational, to be done by a judicious approach and not the outcome of whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness. The expression "just" denotes equitability, fairness and reasonableness, and non- arbitrariness. A person not only suffers injuries on account of accident but also suffers in mind and body on account of the accident throughout his life and a feeling is developed that he is no more a normal man and cannot enjoy the amenities of life as another normal person can. The Supreme Court further held that while fixing compensation, suffering of the mind, shortening of life expectancy, loss of earning capacity, permanence of the disability, loss of amenities of life etc. are to be considered against the backdrop of age, marital status, unusual deprivation one has undertaken in one‟s life etc. 9.6. In Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S. Dhananka, (2009) 6 SCC 1, the Supreme Court held that adequate compensation must strike a balance between the inflated and unreasonable demands of a victim and the equally untenable claim of the opposite party saying that nothing is payable. The Supreme Court further held that the case of an injured and disabled person is, however, more pitiable and the feeling of hurt, helplessness, despair and often destitution enures every day. The support that is needed by a severely handicapped person comes at an enormous price not only on the victim but even more so on the injured‟s family and attendants and the stress saps their energy and destroys their equanimity. The Apex Court further held that compensation has been computed keeping in mind that the brilliant career of the claimant has been cut short and there is, as of now, no possibility of improvement in the claimant‟s condition, the compensation will ensure a steady and reasonable income to the claimant for a time when the claimant is unable to earn for himself. 9.7. In Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd., (2010) 10 SCC 254, the road accident resulted in 100% permanent disability to a final year engineering student. The Supreme Court held the functional disability to be 70% to compute the loss of earning capacity according to the multiplier method. The Supreme Court further held that the whole idea of compensation is to put the claimant in the same position as he was insofar as money can. Perfect compensation is hardly possible but one has to keep in mind that the victim has done no wrong; he has suffered at the hands of the wrongdoer and the court must take care to give him full and fair compensation for what he had suffered. 9.8. In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar, (2011) 1 SCC 343, the Supreme Court considered a large number of precedents and laid down the following principles for computation of compensation in injury cases:-
9.9. In Sri Kumaresh v. Divisional Manager, National Insurance Co. Ltd., 2011 ACJ 1975, the appellant aged 20 years, suffered amputation of his right leg as a result of the accident. The Supreme Court held that the injury will not only severely affect his future prospects of earning, but will also permanently disable him for life and suffer necessary discomforts which accompany living without a leg. The Supreme Court awarded compensation of `10 lakhs for pain and suffering, loss of income during treatment, medical expenses for whole life, loss of future earnings, loss of amenities and enjoyment of life including loss of marital prospects, conveyance charges and food and nourishment. 9.10. In Ramachandrappa v. Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Co. Ltd., (2011) 13 SCC 236, the Supreme Court held that compensation to be awarded is not measured by the nature, location or degree of injury but rather by the extent or degree of the incapacity resulting from the injury. The compensation awarded should be just, fair and proper. The Supreme Court further held that the term „disability‟, as so used, ordinarily means loss or impairment of earning power and has been held not to mean loss of a member of the body.
9.11. In Sri Laxman @ Laxman Mourya v. Divisional Manager, Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., 2012 ACJ 191, the Supreme Court held that if the victim of an accident suffers permanent or temporary disability, then efforts should always be made to award adequate compensation not only for the physical injury and treatment, but also for the pain, suffering and trauma caused due to accident, loss of earning and victim‟s inability to lead a normal life and enjoy other amenities, which he would have enjoyed but for the disability caused due to the accident.
9.12. In Kavita v. Deepak, (2012) 8 SCC 604, the Supreme Court held that victims of accident, who are disabled either permanently or temporarily, adequate compensation should be awarded not only for the physical injury and treatment but also for the loss of earning and inability to lead a normal life and enjoy amenities, which one would have enjoyed had it not been for the disability. The Supreme Court further held that the amount awarded under the head of loss of earning capacity is distinct and does not overlap with amount awarded for pain, suffering, loss of enjoyment of life and medical expenses.
10. Computation of Compensation in cases of Paraplegia 10.1. In Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S. Dhananka (supra), the Supreme Court was dealing with the case of a 20 year old engineering student who became paraplegic due to negligence in a surgical operation. When the case came up for hearing, the claimant was aged 40 years and was working as an IT Engineer earning `28,00,000/- per annum but was confined to a wheelchair and required an attendant -cum- driver due to the nature of his work. The Supreme Court awarded a compensation of `1,00,00,000/-. The break-up of the compensation of `1,00,00,000/- awarded by the Supreme Court is as under:-
Driver-cum-attendant Charges : `7,20,000/-
10.2. In Kavita v. Deepak (supra), the Supreme Court enhanced the compensation from `12,76,480/- to `34,38,747/- relating to a businessman aged 30 years who suffered 75% disability relating to hearing, understanding, speaking and was reduced to a vegetative state. The break-up of the compensation of `34,38,747/- is as under:-
10.3. In K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd., 2012 (10) SCALE 16, a road accident resulted in triple fracture in spinal cord, fracture in left leg and right hand shoulder, deep cut and degloving injury over right left thigh bone and multiple injuries all over the body which resulted in 75% permanent disability. The Supreme Court examined the catena of judgments and held that the victim was entitled to compensation for loss of earning capacity as well as for permanent disability. The Supreme Court awarded compensation of `13,48,000/- to the victim of the road accident. The relevant portion of the judgment is as under:-
The Court held that the multiplier method ensures the just compensation while making for uniformity and certainty of awards. The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced hereunder:-
The claimant was married having two children. She was rendered completely bed-ridden. She was unable to pursue even day to day activities and needed continuous attention. The Gujarat High Court held that a higher amount should have been awarded towards pain, shock and suffering and enhanced the compensation from `20,66,300/- to `25,66,300/-.
10.7. In Arun Sondhi v. DTC, I (2001) ACC 615, a final year student aged 21 years pursuing B.A. course from St. Stephen‟s College, Delhi suffered leg amputation and paralysis in a road accident which resulted in 100% permanent disability. This Court enhanced compensation from `8,68,781/- to `19,16,781/-. The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced hereunder:-
Following R.D. Hattangadi (supra), the compensation was enhanced from `6,67,200/- to `22,23,200/-. The break-up of the compensation awarded by this Court is as under:-
10.10. In Dr. Dattatraya Laxman Shinde v. Nana Raghunath Hire, (2011) 5 Mah LJ 854, a young doctor suffered paraplegia in a motor accident. The paraplegia affected both motor and sensory below thoracic 12 with complete bladder and bowel involvement. Following R.D. Hattangadi (supra) and Raj Kumar (supra), the Bombay High Court enhanced the compensation from `8,85,000/- to `34,50,000/-. The relevant portion of the judgment is as under:-
According to the medical opinion, the dense sensory loss and bladder/bowel involvement is incurable; the injuries suffered by the appellant are likely to affect the longevity of her life; the disability of 80% could also increase in future and the appellant could also develop many other complications because of the involvement of bladder and bowel.
The appellant appeared before this Court on 25th May, 2012 and her condition was seen. The appellant was brought on a wheelchair by her parents and was unable to stand due to post traumatic mylopathy (level T-6) with complete paraplegia (power grade-0) with dense sensory loss and bladder and bowel involvement with B/L ankle and right knee contracture. However, she appeared to be very ambitious to continue her education. In Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences v. Prasanth S. Dhananka (supra), the Supreme Court has awarded compensation of `10,00,000/- towards pain and suffering whereas in the case of Kavita v. Deepak (supra), the Supreme Court has awarded compensation of `3,00,000/- towards pain and suffering. In New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shweta Dilip Mehta (supra), the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court dealt with the injury sustained by a minor child aged 11 years, who became paraplegic as a result of accidental injuries. The Court granted total amount of `4,00,000/- on account of pain and suffering. The Claims Tribunal has awarded compensation of `75,000/- towards pain and suffering which is inadequate. Following the aforesaid judgments, the compensation for pain and suffering is enhanced from `75,000/- to `3,00,000/-.
11.2. Loss of Amenities of Life On account of the permanent disability, the appellant has lost out on several pleasures of her childhood and adolescence, including the ability to move, run and play freely, as other children do. She is a bright and promising student, yet her condition is now an impediment to not only her success, but also everyday ordinary living. Added to this are the physical and mental suffering caused by her medical condition itself, its treatment and the knowledge that she will never be able to lead a normal life. Even looking after personal hygiene has become difficult for her. There is also the loss of expectation of life i.e. the normal lifespan of the person being shortened due to the injury, which causes disappointment and stress. Taking her life expectancy as 65 years as per the World Bank Report of 2010, she has to endure this inconvenience, disappointment and suffering for as much as 46 years from now. The dream of the appellant of having a successful career was shattered by the accident making it difficult to assess compensation in such cases.
As held in R. D. Hattangadi's case (supra), the head of amenities of life includes variety of matters such as the inability to walk, run or sit etc. This head also includes the loss of childhood pleasures such as the free ability to play, dance, the loss of ability to freely move or travel without assistance, etc. In New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Shweta Dilip Mehta (supra), the Bombay High Court awarded compensation of `3,00,000/- towards loss of amenities of life.
The Claims Tribunal has awarded `50,000/- towards loss of amenities of life, discomfort and inconvenience and `3,00,000/- towards loss of expectation of life. The loss of expectation of life is not a separate head. The compensation of `3,50,000/- is, therefore, treated as under the head of loss of amenities of life which takes into account all aspects of a normal life that have been lost due to the injury caused and does not warrant any enhancement.
11.3. Loss of Matrimonial Prospects In Divisional Controller, KSRTC v. Mahadeva Shetty (supra), the Apex Court had awarded `75,000/- towards loss of matrimonial prospects. In Dr. Dattatraya Laxman Shinde v. Nana Raghunath Hire (supra), the Bombay High Court awarded compensation of `75,000/- towards loss of prospects of marriage relying on the Mahadeva Shetty's case (supra).
The Claims Tribunal has awarded `50,000/- towards loss of matrimonial prospects. Taking into consideration that there is the virtual impossibility of marriage as well as a complete loss of the ability to have sex and to have and nurture children, `75,000/- is awarded to the appellant for loss of matrimonial prospects. 11.4. Loss of Earning Capacity The Claims Tribunal has not awarded any compensation for loss of earning capacity due to the permanent disability. Although the permanent disability of the appellant is 80%, the functional disability is held to be 100% as she has no sensation below chest level and she is unable to do any work. The appellant is entitled to compensation for loss of earning capacity due to 100% functional disability. The appellant was a student of nursery standard at the time of the accident and has somehow pursued her education despite paraplegia and 80% permanent disability. She attends her school on a wheelchair. This shows that the appellant is a bright student and would have pursued good career in life. In Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Association of Victims of Uphaar Tragedy , AIR 2012 SC 100, the Supreme Court has awarded `10 lakhs to the victims aged more than 20 years and `7.5 lakhs to the victims aged less than 20 years. In that case, the multiplier of 15 was applied and 1/3rd was deducted towards the personal expenses which means that the Court has assumed the income of the victims aged more than 20 years to be `8,333/- per month and that of victims aged less than 20 years to be `6,249/- per month.
The appellant would have started earning after attaining the age of 20 years. Following the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Association of Victims of Uphaar Tragedy (supra) which relates to a case of 1997, this Court is of the view that it can safely be assumed that the deceased would have earned at least `8,333/- per month. In the present case, the deduction is not permissible as the appellant is alive. Applying multiplier of 18, the loss of earning capacity of the appellant is computed to be `17,99,928/- (`8,333/- x 12 x 18).
11.5. Loss of Education The appellant is claiming tuition fee of `2,000/- per month to continue her studies. The appellant was aged 6 years at the time of the accident and was studying in nursery class. She has somehow completed her education on a wheelchair and is now 19 years old studying in 12th standard. The appellant secured first position in 4th, 5th and 7th standard in her school and has been an exceptional and hardworking student as per Exhibit AW-1/1(Colly). The Claims Tribunal has awarded `2,00,000/- towards loss of education which would cover this head and, therefore, no further compensation is warranted.
11.6. Disfiguration The appellant has been totally disfigured due to the accident. However, the Claims Tribunal has not awarded any compensation under this head. `50,000/- is awarded to the appellant under this head.
11.7. Future Treatment The appellant has claimed future treatment of `25,000/- per year on the ground that she is unable to sense the nature call of urination, frequently suffers infection and requires regular medical treatment. `2,00,000/- is awarded towards future treatment on the ground that the said amount is kept in fixed deposit and the interest thereon should be sufficient to meet this expenditure. 11.8. Cost of Wheelchairs The appellant has claimed `12,50,000/- towards cost of wheelchairs for the next 15 years on the ground that the cost of each wheelchair is `20,000/- and the life of wheelchair is about two years. The appellant has been also advised to use the motorized wheelchair which costs around `1,25,000/-. The amount claimed by the appellant on this head appears to be exorbitant. `1,00,000/- is awarded towards cost of wheelchairs. The appellant has claimed `2,000/- towards the cost of special wheelchair for bathing as she cannot walk. The amount is reasonable and is so awarded.
The appellant has claimed `5,000/- towards the special commode chair as she is unable to use normal toilet. The amount claimed is reasonable and is so awarded.
11.9. Future Attendant Charges The appellant is seeking enhancement of compensation towards the attendant charges @`4,000/- per month for next 15 years. The appellant cannot stand or walk and she moves on a wheelchair which requires a continuous attendant. The compensation of `4,80,000/- awarded by the Claims Tribunal is fair and reasonable and does not warrant any enhancement.
11.10. Conveyance and Future Conveyance The Claims Tribunal has awarded `70,000/- towards conveyance and `50,000/- towards future conveyance which appear to be grossly inadequate. The appellant shall have to move on wheelchair for the rest of her life. The appellant shall have to incur huge expenditure on private transport for carrying the wheelchair. The compensation of `1,50,000/- is awarded to the appellant towards conveyance and future conveyance on the ground that the said amount be kept in fixed deposit and the interest thereon should be sufficient for the appellant to meet the conveyance charges. 11.11. Cost of Special Garments The appellant has made a claim for special undergarments costing `500/- each for the next 15 years. `50,000/- is awarded under this head on the ground that the said amount be kept in fixed deposit and the same should be sufficient to meet the expenses under this head.
The appellant has also claimed the cost of the jacket to be worn on a wheelchair. The appellant has been advised by a doctor to wear a jacket to balance her body on a wheelchair which costs `35,000/- and has a life of about one year. `50,000/- is fair and reasonable under this head and is so awarded.
11.12. Physiotherapy The appellant has claimed the cost of the physiotherapist @`500 per visit. `1,00,000/- is awarded under this head on the ground that the said amount be kept in fixed deposit and the interest thereon should be sufficient to meet the expenses under this head. 11.13.Interest The Claims Tribunal has awarded interest @6% per annum which is on a lower side. In Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Association of Victims of Uphaar Tragedy (supra) and Subulaxmi v. Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation, 2012 (10) SCALE 617, the Supreme Court has awarded interest @9% per annum from the date of filing of claim petition. Following the aforesaid judgments, the rate of interest is enhanced from 6% per annum to 9% per annum from the date of filing of claim petition. 11.14. The appellant is entitled to total compensation of `41,19,928/- as per break-up given hereunder:-
12.1. In the facts and circumstances of this case, the appeal is allowed and the compensation is enhanced from `15,13,000/- to `41,19,928/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of filing of the claim petition till realization. 12.2. The enhanced award amount along with up to date interest be deposited by the respondent with the UCO Bank, Delhi High Court Branch by means of a cheque drawn in the name of UCO Bank A/c Ritu within 30 days. Upon the aforesaid amount being deposited, UCO Bank shall keep the said amount in fixed deposit till further orders.
12.3. The order of disbursement of the said amount shall be passed after examining the appellant.
12.4. List for appearance of the appellant on 1st February, 2013. 12.5. Copy of this judgment be sent to the parties.
J.R. MIDHA, J DECEMBER 07, 2012