Bangalore District Court
Sri. Paneer Selvam vs M/S Kashi Security And Consulting on 31 January, 2022
Services Pvt. Ltd., Office at No.3332, 13th Main Road, 6th Cross, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar, Bengaluru-560 038.
Represented by its Managing Director.
(By Advocate Shri. G. L.
Vishwanath) ECA No. 171 / 2018
-: J U D G M E N T :-
This petition filed by the claimant seeking compensation on account of injuries sustained in the accident.
2. The case of the petitioner that he was working as a filed officer in KASHI Security Private Limited ( Security Agency) under respondent. On 09-10-2015 at about 2 a. m., while discharging his duties as a field officer, he sustained grievous injuries on account of rash and negligent driving of driver of car bearing registered No. KA-28-B-7175. He was working as a field officer with respondent on a monthly salary of Rs.26,000/-. In spite of assurance given by the respondent that compensation would be given, same having not paid, claim petition is said to have been filed.
ECA No. 171 / 2018
3. On service of notice, the respondent appeared and submitted objection and denied age and income of the petitioner. The respondent denied the incident as it is stated to have taken place in the claim petition. It is further stated that the petitioner has received the amount of Rs. 1,64,545/- towards payment of medical expenses. The petitioner has not approached the Court with clean hands. The petition is not maintainable, the claim petition is sought to be dismissed on the ground that the petitioner has received the compensation amount.
4. The points that would arise for consideration are as follows :
5. In order to prove the case of the petitioner, the petitioner has got examined himself as PW1. He relied on Ex. P-1 to Ex. P-13. On the other hand, the respondent has not led evidence. The respondent relied on Ex. R-1 to Ex. R-8.
ECA No. 171 / 2018
6. Heard the arguments.
7. My findings to the above issues are as follows:-
ADDITIONAL ISSUE Nos. 1 to 3 :-
8. These points are interlinked with each other, and hence taken together for common discussion. The petitioner has been examined as PW.1, and he has produced the true copies of FIR, spot panchanama, rough sketch, IMV report, wound certificate, charge- sheet, discharge summary, attendance register, appointment letter, and pay slip which have been marked as Ex. P-1 to Ex. P-13. PW-1 has filed an affidavit in lieu ECA No. 171 / 2018 of examination-in-chief on oath and re-iterated the contents of the petition, and he has been cross-examined by the respondent.
9. Learned counsel for petitioner argued that the petitioner had proved the fact that petitioner was employed by respondent. The petitioner was working as a field officer. The respondent has admitted the employment of petitioner. He further argued that the compensation has to be determined with reference to loss of earning capacity. According to the petitioner, once it was established that the petitioner was employee under the respondent, it is not necessary to produce the document to show the income of petitioner.
10. Per contra, learned counsel for respondent submit that the petitioner was not come under the definition of employee under the Employee Compensation Act. No proper and cogent materials ECA No. 171 / 2018 placed regarding the incident. It is further contended that the petitioner has received the medical expenses from the company. The petitioner had received the compensation under the Motor Vehicle Act 1988. The petition under the Employee Compensation Act is not maintainable. The petitioner has not approached th Court with clean hands. Hence, the respondent sought the dismissal of the petition on the ground that the petition is not maintainable.
11. The real test to find out if a person is a worker or not is to see whether the owner or occupier of the factory exercises any supervision and control over him as to the details of his work. According to the respondent, the petitioner who did the filed work is not "workers" within the four corners of the Act. Having regard to the nature of the work and particularly the fact that payment was made on work basis, so the argument ran, no direct supervision of the operation was at all necessary but the ECA No. 171 / 2018 right or authority to control the work was all along there.
12. In the case of Dharangadhra Chemical Works Ltd. v. State of Saurashtra, AIR 1957 SC 264, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that "the principle which emerges from these authorities is that the prima facie test for the determination of the relationship between master and servant is the existence of the right in the master to supervise and control the work done by the servant not only in the matter of directing what work the servant is to do but also the manner in which he shall do his work, or to borrow the words of Lord Uthwatt at page 23 in Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins and Griffiths (Liverpool) Ltd. 1947-1 AC 1, at p. 23, 'The proper test is whether or not the hirer had authority to control the manner of execution of the act in question.' ECA No. 171 / 2018 Thus, the nature or extent of control which is requisite to establish the relationship of employer and employee must necessarily vary from business to business and is by its very nature incapable of precise definition. As has been noted above, recent pronouncements of the Court of Appeal in England have even expressed the view that it is not necessary for holding that a person is an employee, that the employer should be proved to have exercised control over his work, that the test of control was not one of universal application and that there were many contracts in which the master could not control the manner in which work was done. The correct method of approach, therefore, would be to consider whether having regard to the nature of the work there was due control and supervision by the employer.
13. On the contrary, it has been argued by learned counsel for the respondent, that the facts of the case must ECA No. 171 / 2018 lead to the conclusion that there was in this case no control and no supervision and the relationship of the petitioner and the respondent was not that of an employer and an employee or master and servant but that the filed officer was really in the position of an independent work. It is also contention of the respondent that the person working for the owner of an establishment on the conditions 'come when you like, go when you like, work when you like, stop when you like, work as fast as you can, work as slow as you like, work on what you like or not at all', cannot be said to be 'employed' by the owner of the establishment and will not fall within the definition of 'employee under the definition of Employees' Compensation Act, 1923.
14. It is well settled law that the the 'employer' is one who employs or one who engages the services of other persons. The 'employee' is one who works for another for hire. The employment is contract of service ECA No. 171 / 2018 between the 'employer' and 'employee' whereunder the employee agreed to serve the employer subject to his control and supervision. In the case of Chintaman Rao
-Vs- State of M. P, reported in AIR 1958 SC 388 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has considered the concept of employment in Section 2(1) of the Act which defines the expression "worker" as under:
15. There is a well understood distinction between a contractor and workman and between contract for service and contract of service. A 'contractor' is a person who, in the pursuit of an independent business, undertakes to do specific jobs of work for other persons without submitting himself to their control in respect to the details of the work. From the current of the ECA No. 171 / 2018 decisions on the subject and particularly the two decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court to which I have already referred, the following propositions are clearly deducible:
The concept of employment in the definition of 'worker' in S. 2(1) of the Act involves three ingredients of employer, employee and the contract of employment. The employment is the contract of service between the employer and the employee whereunder the employee agrees to serve the employer subject to his control and supervision.
16. The prima facie test for the determination of the relationship of employer and employee is whether or not the agency had right to supervise and control the manner of execution of the work in question. The nature or extent of control which is requisite to establish the relationship of employer and employee must ECA No. 171 / 2018 necessarily vary from business to business. No distinction can be drawn from the circumstance of a person being remunerated at so much per day or by the job or piece-work. The circumstance that rules regarding tours of work, etc. applicable to other persons may not be conveniently applied to the case of persons doing particular work such for instance that of filed officer does not prevent the relationship of employer and employee existing between the management and the persons doing such work. But there are many contracts of service where the management cannot be said ostensibly to control or supervise directly the manner in which the work is to be done by persons engaged for the purpose although it may be clear that the work done is an integral part of the business. The prima facie test of supervision and control is not always easy to apply in the context of modern industrial conditions. Though the broad principles governing the question have been affirmed in the decided cases no conclusive test and no ECA No. 171 / 2018 definite criterion of universal applicability has been laid down for the determination of the question whether in a given case a person is a worker or an independent contractor. Doubt and difficulty must beset the question for contracts which fall under either category have at times many characteristics and features which are common and the inquiry no doubt perplexing must ultimately be resolved like any complicated question of fact. The border line between an employee employed in service and an independent contractor is at times rather fine and a clear-cut demarcation is not always possible. At one end of the scale can be the case, to take the illustration of a field officer who attends and works in a agency and is paid wages in the ordinary sense that is on periodical basis. The nature of the work being very simple little direct supervision would be necessary on the part of the employer except for the purpose of seeing that the field officer puts in full time and regular work. But the control and supervision is indubitably there, and ECA No. 171 / 2018 no one would suggest that the field officer is not a worker employed by the agency. At the other end of the scale can be the case of a contract by the respondent with a petitioner to whom fulfills the contract by engaging persons to do the work.
17. Four indicia of a contract of service derived from authorities of Courts in England were recapitulated by Lord Thankerton in Short v. Henderson Ltd., decided by the House of Lords and reported in (1946) 62 T.L.R 427 at p. 429:
Wilsons and Clyde Coal Co., 1928 SC 121, at p. 134 that selection, payment and control are inevitable in ECA No. 171 / 2018 every contract of service, is clearly open to reconsideration".
18. 'Supervision' and 'control' are not expressions of inflexible import and exercise of the same can in some cases be of a very nebulous character. The scope as also the manner of the exercise of supervision and control in a given case must of necessity depend on a variety of factors such for instance as the nature of the work done by a person, the circumstances in which and the place where he is asked or permitted to do the work, the skill or technique or method, if any, required of him in performance of the work, the status and the number of persons engaged in performance of the work and in a large majority of cases on the mode or manner of remuneration adopted in respect of the particular work required of a person. Applying the prima facie test of the existence of right to supervise and control the manner in which the work is to be done as determinative of the ECA No. 171 / 2018 existence of the relationship of employer and employee and considered in the light of the observations I have made, the facts of the case before me lead to the conclusion that the petitioner who was working as field officer in the employment of the respondent and a 'worker' within the meaning of that expression in Section 2(1) of the Act. The nature of the work in the case before me being of the simplest and a well-defined task and the remuneration being on the basis of quantity of work done little direct supervision actually needed to be exercised but such supervision as was felt necessary by the management was of course there and what is more important there was the right to supervise the manner in which the work was to be done. It is abundantly clear that it was due to these two elements of the simple nature of the operation and payment on the basis of quantity of work actually done that the management had little occasion to give specific directions as to the manner of doing the work or to watch the progress of the work.
ECA No. 171 / 2018 These aspects appear to me to be the speciality of the situation. The modus operandi adopted by the management shows that the right and authority to control the manner in which the work of petitioner was to be done was also there. Thus, the contention of the respondent that the petitioner is not an employee within the meaning of Employees' Compensation Act, 1923, cannot be accepted.
19. Another contention of the respondent is that the petitioner has obtained the compensation under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. It is also contended that the respondent has paid the medical expenses to the petitioner. Hence, the petitioner is not maintainable under the compensation under the Employees' Compensation Act, 1923. In support of his contention, he has produced the certificated copies of judgments and award i.e., Ex. R-7 and Ex. R-8. These documents disclose that the petitioner had filed the petition for the ECA No. 171 / 2018 compensation under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and entitled the compensation under the said Act.
20. As per Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, the claimants cannot claim compensation both under the Workmen's Compensation Act as well as Motor Vehicles Act. Section 167 of the Act reads as under: "Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases : -
21. The plain Reading of the above provision makes it very clear that an option was given to the claimants to seek compensation either under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 or under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The claimants having opted to file a claim petition before the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation and accepted the compensation awarded under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, were precluded by Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 to seek compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgment reported in the case of NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v/s MASTAN AND ANOTHER has clearly held that Section 167 contains a non-obstante clause provision providing for such an option ECA No. 171 / 2018 notwithstanding anything contained in the 1923 Act. Paragraph 33 of the said judgment reads as under:
That section provides that death or bodily injury arising out of a motor accident which may also give rise to a claim for compensation under the Workmen's Compensation Act, can be enforced through the authorities under that Act, the option in that behalf being with the victim or his representative. But Section ECA No. 171 / 2018 167 makes it clear that a claim could not be maintained under both the Acts. In other words, a claimant who becomes entitled to claim compensation both under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and under the Workmen's Compensation Act because of a motor vehicle accident has the choice of proceeding under either of the Acts before the concerned forum. By confining the claim to the authority or Tribunal under either of the Acts, the Legislature has incorporated the concept of election of remedies, insofar as the claimant is concerned. In other words, he has to elect whether to make his claim under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. The emphasis in the section that a claim cannot be made under both ECA No. 171 / 2018 the enactments, is a further reiteration of the doctrine of election incorporated in the scheme for claiming compensation. ....."
22. The main contention of the claimant is that immediately on account of accident, he filed a claim petition for claiming compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, and thereafter, the petitioner filed a present petition with regard to group insurance made by the Employer and under that insurance policy a separate premium was paid for the employees working at Work under Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. Hence, the claimant ie entitled to claim both under the Group Insurance insured with the separate Insurance Company and also under the Motor Vehicles Act for the third party claim. On perusal of the claim petition filed before the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation it is clear that compensation was sought for the injuries ECA No. 171 / 2018 sustained during the course and out of employment whereas under the Motor Vehicles Act, the claimant has sought for compensation for the injuries sustained during the course of employment. In view of the specific bar under Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, two claim petitions cannot be filed before Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation as well as the Motor Vehicle Act for the compensation. The Tribunal has examined the matter in proper perspective. The Division Bench of this Court in a judgment reported 2014 (1) LLJ 04 (supra) held that "even though Employer has deposited the compensation amount under the Workmen's Compensation Act, the claimants can maintain the claim petition under Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act. However, while awarding the compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, the compensation awarded under the Workmen's Compensation Act has to be deducted from the amount payable under the Motor Vehicles Act". The Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgment ECA No. 171 / 2018 reported in ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v/s DYAMAVVA AND OTHERS, CIVIL APPEAL No. 937 / 2013, held as under:
23. In view of the law declared by the Hon'ble Apex Court, an option was available to the claimants to seek compensation either under the Workmen's ECA No. 171 / 2018 Compensation Act, 1923 or under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. In the instant case, the Tribunal has already awarded compensation. While awarding the compensation amount under the Workmen's Compensation Act, the amount awarded under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 has to be deducted.
24. Under Section 3(1) of the Employees Compensation Act, 1923, if personal injury is caused to an employee by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, his employer shall be liable to pay compensation. Under this Section, an employee who dies or suffers partial or total disablement for more than 3 days or permanent total disablement due to accident is entitled to get compensation from employer. However, in order to succeed under Section 3(1) for claiming compensation, it has to be proved by the employee that,
1. there was an accident, ECA No. 171 / 2018
2. the accident had a causal connection with the employment and
3. the accident must have been suffered in course of employment.
The phrase "arising out of employment" isn't merely confined to the nature of the employment. The phrase applies to conditions, obligations and incidents of employment as well. If by reason of any of these factors the workman is under danger and suffers injury, then the injury would be one which arises "out of employment." In Oriental Fire and General Insurance Company Limited v. Sunderbai Ramji, the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court determined the scope of the expression 'accident arising out of employment' occurring under Section 3 of the Act. In this case, the deceased labourer was doing work involving hard labour and strenuous physical exertion. One morning after 3 hours of work, ECA No. 171 / 2018 he had suffered chest pain and subsequently fainted. He was declared dead at Hospital. The Commissioner found that deceased was involved in a very heavy and hard labour work, which undoubtedly would affect the physical efficiency and health, and inferred that the labourer died because of the nature of his job. It means he died due to an accident arising out of employment covered under Section 3 of the Act".
25. The phrase "in the course of the employment" means in the course of the work which the workman is employed to do and which is incidental to it. The Doctrine of Notional Extension provides the scope of the phrase "in the course of the employment. As a rule, the employment of a workman does not commence until he has reached the place of employment and does not continue when he has left the place of employment. The journey to and from the place of employment is ECA No. 171 / 2018 excluded. However, as per the Notional Extension theory there could be reasonable extension of course of employment in terms of time and place and a workman may be regarded as in the course of his employment even though he had not reached or had left his employer's premises. There is a notional extension of both the entry and exit of work place by time and space. The scope of such extension must necessarily depend on the circumstances of a given case. An employment may end or may begin not only when the employee begins to work or leaves his tools but also when he uses the means of access and egress to and from the place of employment.
26. In General Manager, B. E. S. T.
Undertaking, Bombay v. Mrs. Agnes, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that "The employment does not necessarily end when the "down tool" signal is given or ECA No. 171 / 2018 when the workman leaves the actual workshop where he is working. There is a notional extension at both the entry and exit by time and space. The scope of such extension must necessarily depend on the circumstances of a given case. The doctrine of notional extension of employment developed in the context of specific workshops, factories or harbours, equally applies to such a bus service which provided to employees to get to job on time and reaching their home without further strain contributing to their overall efficiency. The bus service is used as a privilege and matter of right. Their workplace gets notionally extended by virtue of this service."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court held that when a driver when going home from the depot or coming to ECA No. 171 / 2018 the depot uses the bus, any accident that happens to him is an accident in the course of his employment. Admittedly, in this case the accident occurred during the course of employment of the petitioner.
27. It is well settled law that the total disablement means disablement, whether of a temporary or permanent nature, as incapacitates a workman for all work which he was capable of performing. In such circumstances, it is necessary for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he become incapable of performing all work which he was capable of performing at the time of accident. In the present case, the evidence on record is that the petitioner was working as a filed officer and the Tribunal assessed his disablement 14%. Accordingly, I answer Additional Issue Nos. 1 to 3 are is in the "Affirmative"
28. The Tribunal assessed the the 14% disability of the petitioner. Therefore it is appropriate to consider the medical evidence that this petitioner to have physical disability to the extent of 14%. Therefore, the petitioner said to have suffered a loss of 14% of his earning capacity as a field officer. While awarding compensation under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, income was taken as Rs. 20,000/- p.m., and awarded compensation. The relevant factor applicable would be 156.47. Accordingly, compensation required to be computed to which claimant would be entitled to and same would be Rs.20,000/-50%= Rs.10,000/- X14/100 X 156.47 = Rs.2,19,058/- which is future loss of income on account of permanent disability. Thus, petitioner is entitled for compensation of Rs 2,19,058./-. With regard to quantum of compensation is concerned, though the claimant claimed that he was getting a salary of ECA No. 171 / 2018 Rs.26,000/- p.m., no document has been produced to establish the same. While awarding compensation under the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, Act, income was taken as Rs. 20,000/- p.m., and awarded compensation. While awarding compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, the Tribunal had taken the income of Rs. 20,000/- p.m., the Tribunal has awarded a sum of Rs.4,37,000/- towards loss of future income. In all, a sum of Rs.9,45,000/- with interest at 9% p.a. In this case, the petitioner has already received the compensation under the under the Motor Vehcles Act and also medical expenses from the respondent. Hence, the petitioner is not entitled compensation under Employees' Compensation Act, 1923. Accordingly, I answer this issue in the "Negative".
ISSUE No. 3 :-
29. Due to the findings as above, the following:
(Dictated to the Stenographer, transcribed and typed on Lap-top, then corrected by me, Print out taken, signed and then pronounced by me in the open court on this the 31st day of January 2022) (K. LAKSHMI) IV Addl. SCJ & ACMM., Bengaluru.
ECA No. 171 / 2018
-: A N N E X U R E :-
List of Witnesses Examined by the Plaintiffs:
PW.1 : L. Paneer Selvam List of documents marked by the Plaintiff :
List of Witnesses examined by the Defendant:
-Nil-
List of Documents Marked by the Defendant :
Compensation Act is hereby dismissed.
Advocate fee is fixed at Rs. 500/-.
(K. LAKSHMI) IV Addl. SCJ & ACMM, Bengaluru.
ECA No. 171 / 2018 ECA No. 171 / 2018 AWARD SCCH NO.6 BEFORE THE MOTOR ACCIDENT CLAIMS TRIBUNAL METROPOLITAN AREA : BANGALORE ECA No. 171 /2018 PETITIONER/S : Sri. Paneer Selvam S/o Sri V. Lakshman, Aged about 48 years, R/at No.99, 10th Main, 3rd Stage, Manjunathanagar, Bengaluru-560 010.
(By Advocate Shri. K B Naveen Kumar) V/s RESPONDENT : M/s Kashi Security and Consulting Services Pvt. Ltd., Office at No.3332, 13th Main Road, 6th Cross, HAL 2nd Stage, Indiranagar, Bengaluru-560 038.
Represented by its Managing Director.
(By Advocate Shri. G. L.
Vishwanath) WHEREAS, this petition filed on by the petitioner/s above named U/Sec.166 of the M.V.C. Act, ECA No. 171 / 2018 praying for the compensation of Rs.....
(Rupees compensation on account of death of Shri. WHEREAS, this claim petition coming up before Smt.K.Lakshmi, IV Addl.Judge, Court of Small Causes, Bangalore, in the presence of Sri/Smt.
Advocate for petitioner/s and of Sri/Smt. Advocate for respondent/s.
Advocate fee is fixed at Rs. 500/-.
Given under my hand and seal of the Court this the day of 2022.
MEMBER MOTOR ACCIDENT CLAIMS TRIBUNAL,BENGALURU.
ECA No. 171 / 2018 By the ________________________ Petitioner/s Respondents Court fee paid on Petition Court fee paid on Powers Court fee paid on I.A.