Delhi District Court
State vs Unknown on 13 January, 2014
Author: Ms. Balwinder Singh
1. Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the present challan filed by the prosecution under Section 66/192A & DMVR 6/177 of Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as M.V. Act). The brief fact of the case as per prosecution are that on 31.12.2012 at about 09.55 pm the accused Pradeep Kumar was driving Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 1 of 19 one Chartered Bus bearing No. DL­1PC­4452 at Aurobindo Marg, Essex Farms while coming from IIT Gate side and going towards Adhchini side. It is the case of the prosecution that the accused was carrying passengers inside the vehicle and when the challaning officer asked him to produce his valid Driving Badge issued by State Transport Authority, he could not produce the same. It is further the case of the prosecution that the details of the driver/owner of the vehicle and the helpline number of the State Transport Authority were not found to be printed on the exterior body of the vehicle. Therefore, the challaning officer issued the present challan which is Ex.PW­1/A against the accused for violation of DMVR 6/177 and also for Section 66/192A i.e. for the violation of permit conditions on account of not having a valid PSV Driving Badge and due to absence of details of driver/owner of the vehicle and helpline number of STA on the exterior body of the vehicle. The offending vehicle was also impounded U/s 207 of M.V. Act.
2. Since the offences are bailable, the accused/driver is admitted to bail on furnishing of bail bond and surety bond in a sum of Rs.10,000/­. An application for the release of offending vehicle on superdari was moved by the owner of the vehicle and the same was accepted and the vehicle was released on superdari on furnishing of superdarinama in a sum of Rs.8,00,000/­.
3. Notice of accusation was served upon the accused/driver U/s 251 CrPC to which the accused/driver pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
4. In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined two witnesses namely PW1 ASI Sultan Singh, No.2068/T and PW2 Const. Anil Kumar, No.5035D and also proved the challan which is Ex.PW­1/A.

Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 2 of 19 PW1 ASI Sultan Singh in his examination­in­chief deposed that on the day of incident i.e. 31.12.2012 he was posted on duty at IIT Chowk alongwith PW2 Const. Anil Kumar. At around 09.50 a.m., the offending vehicle came from AIIMS side. At that time they were performing their duties near Essex Farm. On seeing the offending vehicle, PW1 directed PW2 to signal the driver of the said bus to stop the same. Thereafter, PW1 inspected the documents of the vehicle and found that the accused was not having his valid PSV Driving Badge. PW1 further deposed that when they inspected the offending vehicle, they found that the details of the accused driver and the helpline number of State Transport Authority were not printed on the exterior body of the vehicle. Thereafter, he issued the present challan against the accused which is Ex.PW­1/A bearing his signature at point A and also impounded the offending vehicle U/s 207 of M.V. Act.
In his cross examination, PW1 deposed that he did not took any photograph of the offending vehicle to corroborate the fact that the details of the accused driver and helpline number of State Transport Authority were missing on the exterior body of the vehicle. He also negated the suggestion of Ld. Defence Counsel that the present challan is a false challan and the same was issued only due to pressure from the higher authorities after December, 2012 gangrape agitation.
In his examination­in­chief, PW2 deposed that on the day of incident i.e. 31.12.2012, he was posted on duty at IIT Chowk alongwith PW1. At around 09.55 a.m. the offending vehicle came from IIT Gate side and on the direction of PW1 he stopped the same. Thereafter, PW1 checked the documents of the vehicle. The accused driver could not produce his valid PSV Driving Badge. It is further noticed that the details of the accused driver and the owner of the Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 3 of 19 vehicle and the helpline number of the State Transport Authority were not printed on the exterior body of the vehicle. Therefore, PW1 issued the present challan against the accused.
In his cross­examination, PW2 deposed that he did not signed on the challan as a witness. He deposed that PW1 ASI Sultan Singh took the photographs of the offending vehicle in his mobile phone. In the end he negated the suggestion of Ld. Defence Counsel that he was not present at the spot when the accused was challaned.

5. After the completion of Prosecution evidence the statement of accused/driver U/s 313 CrPC was recorded. During the examination of accused U/s 313 CrPC, the entire incriminating evidence appearing against the accused was put to him and he was given an opportunity to explain the incriminating evidence appearing against him to which he submitted that he accepts the fact that he was driving the offending vehicle on the day of incident at Aurobindo Marg, Essex Farms and that he was stopped by the challaning officer. However, he submitted that he does have a valid training certificate issued by STA, Delhi for issuance of Driving Badge and submitted that it is incorrect that the details of the accused driver/owner of the vehicle and the helpline number of State Transport Authority were not printed on the exterior body of the vehicle.
6. After examination of accused/driver U/s 313 CrPC, he submitted that he wish to lead Defence Evidence. However, in his defence the accused did not examine any witness rather only produced on record original training certificate for PSV Driving Badge, photographs of the offending vehicle and a copy of the notification issued by State Transport Authority. The said original documents Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 4 of 19 were perused and returned to the accused. The copies thereof are taken on record and exhibited as DW­1/A and DW­1/B. The photographs of the offending vehicle have been exhibited as DW­1/C1 to DW­1/C3 and, thereafter, the matter was fixed for hearing of final arguments.

7. I have heard Ld. APP for the State as well as Ld. Defence Counsel at length and have carefully gone through the entire record and evidence and after carefully perusing the same, I am giving my finding as per below:
In the present challan, the accused was challaned for the violations of Section 66/192A & DMVR 6/177 of M.V. Act,1988.
(a) Sec. 66 of The Motor Vehicle Act , 1988 provides that:
Necessity for permits - (1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used:
Provided that a stage carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a contract carriage:
Provided further that a stage carriage permit may subject to any conditions that may be specified in the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a goods carriage either when carrying passengers or not:

Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 5 of 19 Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the permit, authorise the holder to use the vehicle for the carriage of goods for on in connection with a trade or business carried on by him.
(2) The Holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle, for the drawing of any trailer or semi­trailer not owned by him, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed:
[Provided that the holder of a permit of any articulated vehicle may use the prime­mover of that articulated vehicle for any other semi­trailor] (3) The provisions of sub­section (1) shall not apply ­
(a) to any transport vehicle owned by the Central Government or a State Government and used for Government purposes unconnected with any commercial enterprise;
(b) to any transport vehicle owned by a local authority or by a person acting under contract with a local authority and used solely for road cleansing, road watering or conservancy purposes;
(c) to any transport vehicle used solely for police, fire brigade or ambulance purposes;
(d) to any transport vehicle used solely for the conveyance of corpses and the mourners accompanying the corpses;
manufactures or deals in motor vehicles or builds bodies for attachment to chassis, solely for such purposes and in accordance with such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(i) to any goods vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of which does not exceed 3,000 kilograms;
(j) subject to such conditions as the Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette, specify to any transport vehicle purchased in one State and proceeding to a place, situated in that Sate or in any other State, without carrying any passenger or goods;
(k) to any transport vehicle which has been temporarily registered under section 43 while proceeding empty to any place for the purpose of registration of the vehicle.
(m) to any transport vehicle which, owing to flood, earthquake or any other natural calamity, obstruction on road or unforeseen circumstances, is required to be diverted through any other route, Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 7 of 19 whether within or outside the State, with a view to enabling it to reach its destination;
(n) to any transport vehicle used for such purposes as the Central or State Government may, by order, specify;
(o) to any transport vehicle which is subject to a hire­ purchase, lease or hypothecation agreement and which owing to the default of the owner has been taken possession of by or on behalf of the person with whom the owner has entered into such agreement, to enable such motor vehicle to reach its destination; or
(p) to any transport vehicle while proceeding empty to any place for purpose of repair.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub­section (3), sub­ section (1) shall, if the State Government by rule made under section 96 so prescribes apply to any motor vehicle adapted to carry more than nine person excluding the driver.
The penalty for violation of Section 66 of M.V. Act is provided in Section 192A.
Sec.192A of The Motor Vehicle Act,1988 provides that : Using vehicle without permit - (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of sub­section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purpose for which the vehicle may be used Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 8 of 19 shall be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less than three months or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that the court may for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injury or for the transport of materials for repair or for the transport of food or materials to relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose:
Provided that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority within seven days from the date of such use.
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature specified in sub­section (1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made.
Rule 6 of DMVR provides that :
Driver's Badge. ­ (1) The driver of a public service vehicle shall display on his left chest a metal or plastic badge of the shape, size and colour approved by the Commissioner from time to time issued by, and inscribed with, the name of the Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 9 of 19 authority by which an authorization to drive a public service vehicle has been granted and word "Driver" together with an identification number. The issuing authority for badges shall be the licensing authority as given in rule 3.
(2) A driver of a public service vehicle shall not hold more than one such badge issued in the State.
(3) The fee for the issue of a badge as aforesaid by the licensing authority shall be Rupees 9[Two hundred.] If the badge is lost or destroyed a duplicate badge shall be issued on payment of Rupees 10[Two hundred] as penalty/charges thereof. (4) If at any time the authorization on a driver's licence entitling him to drive a public service vehicle is suspended or revoked by any authority or any court or ceased to be valid by the efflux of time, the driver shall within seven days thereof surrender the badge to the licensing authority.
(5) An appeal against the order of issuing authority for badges shall be dealt within the same manner as in the case of driving licence given in Rule 4.
The penalty for the violation of rule 6 of DMVR is provided under sec. 177 of the Motor vehicle Act.
Section 177 of M.V. Act provides that:
General provision for punishment of offences - Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 10 of 19 extend to one hundred rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.
It is also important to go through some other important provisions for the better understanding of violation of provisions of Motor Vehicle Act as alleged to be committed by the accused. Therefore, we must understand the meaning of permit, contract carriage permit as well as stage carriage permit, a motor vehicle, a transport vehicle and must also have a reading of Section 84 of M.V. Act.
Section 2(31) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Permit"
"Permit" means a permit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority prescribed in this behalf under this Act authorizing the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle;
Section 2(7) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Contract carriage"
"Contract carriage" means a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passengers for hire or reward and is engaged under a contract, whether expressed or implied for the use of such vehicle as a whole for the carriage of passengers mentioned therein and entered into by a person with a holder of a permit in relation to such vehicle or any person authorised by him in this behalf on a fixed or an agreed rate or sum ­ Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 11 of 19
(a) on a time basis, whether or not with reference to any route or distance; or
(b) from one point to another, and in either case, without stopping to pick up or set down passengers not included in the contract anywhere during the journey, and includes ­
(i) a maxicab; and
(ii) a motor cab notwithstanding that separate fares are charged for its passengers;
Section 2(40) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Stage Carriage".
"Stage Carriage" means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the whole journey or for stages journey;
Section 2(28) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Motor Vehicle"
"Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a trailer; but does not include a vehicle running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any other enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of not Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 12 of 19 exceeding [twenty­five cubic centimetres] Section 2(47) of The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 defines "Transport Vehicle"
"Transport vehicle" means a public service vehicle, a good carriage, an educational institute bus or a private service vehicle.
Section 84 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988.
General conditions attaching to all permits - The following shall be conditions of every permit­
(a) that the vehicle to which the permit relates carries valid certificate of fitness issued under section 56 and is at all times so maintained as to comply with the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder;
(b) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven at a speed exceeding the speed permitted under this Act;
(c) that any prohibition or restriction imposed any fares or freight fixed by notification made under section 67 are observed in connection with the vehicle to which the permit relates;
(d) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven in contravention of the provisions of section 5 or section 113;
(e) that the provisions of this Act limiting the hours of work of drivers are observed in connection with any vehicle or vehicles to which the permit relates;

they apply to the holder of the permit are observed; and
(g) that the name and address of the operator shall be painted or otherwise firmly affixed to every vehicle to which the permit relates on the exterior of the body of that vehicle on both sides thereof in a colour or colours vividly contrasting to the colour of the vehicle centered as high as practicable below the window line in bold letters.
8. Thus in order to prove the guilt of the accused and to sustain his conviction the prosecution is required to establish beyond reasonable doubts that:

3 . Due to the abovementioned two reasons, the accused is also liable for violation of permit conditions as laid down by State Transport Authority by virtue of Powers conferred upon it by Section 74 M.V. Act for laying down conditions with respect to permits issued by it and also by reason of not complying with the requirement of Section 84 of M.V. Act.
To prove this, firstly Ld. APP for State has argued before the court that both the prosecution witnesses namely PW1 ASI Sultan Singh and PW2 Const. Anil Kumar have proved the challan on record and have remained consistent in their testimonies. However, Ld. counsel for the accused argued Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 14 of 19 before the court that the both the challaning officers were at a mistake and in ignorance of law they challaned the accused for the violation of permit violation U/s 66/192A of M.V. Act on account of not having a valid PSV Driving Badge. Further, there are many inconsistencies and loopholes in the testimonies of prosecution witnesses which raises serious doubts as to their veracity vis­a­vis the other allegations against the accused. Ld. Defence Counsel has made the following submissions to support his claim:
Firstly, the Ld. Counsel for accused has argued that in the present case the first allegation against the accused driver is that he did not had a valid PSV Driving Badge and due to that he is also liable for violation of permit conditions as per the guidelines issued by State Transport Authority. Both PW1 and PW2 have categorically deposed in their testimonies that the accused did not have any valid PSV Driving Badge. The Ld. Defence Counsel has argued that it is correct that the accused does not have a smart card based PSV Driving Badge. However, he has completed training for the issuance of PSV Driving Badge in his favour and has also received a certificate from the Transport Department of Delhi with respect to that and the said certificate is valid till 16.02.2014. The said certificate was produced before this court for perusal and the copy of the said certificate is already on record and is exhibited as mark DW­1/A. Therefore, there is no substance in the allegations of both PW1 and PW2 that the accused does not have a valid PSV Driving Badge. The accused has a valid PSV Driving Badge training certificate and only due to some delay on the part of concerned transport authority, smart card based PSV Driving Badge could not be issued in his favour and for that delay the accused cannot be made liable and prosecuted for violating the statutory provisions of DMVR 6/177 M.V. Act.
Secondly, the Ld. Defence Counsel has argued before the court that Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 15 of 19 allegation of the prosecution that since the accused did not have a valid PSV Driving Badge, he is also liable for violation of 66/192A M.V. Act, is without any substance and relevance. The prosecution has not placed on record any document or any other material/notification/standing order to prove the abovesaid allegations. The notification issued by the State Transport Authority which makes violation of DMVR 6/177 of M.V. Act a violation of permit condition was issued in January, 2013 and the said notification came into operation on 15.03.2013. A copy of the same is already on record and is exhibited as Mark DW/1B. The said notification was prospective in operation and was not meant to cover violations committed before the date of its operation. In the present case, since the violation as alleged by the prosecution happened much before that date, therefore it would not cover the present case and, accordingly, the accused would not be liable for any permit violations.
Thirdly, the Ld. Counsel for accused has argued that the second allegation against the accused is that the details of accused driver/owner of the vehicle and helpline number of the State Transport Authority were missing on the exterior body of the vehicle and due to that reason, the accused failed to comply with the requirement of Section 84 of M.V. Act and, therefore, he also becomes liable for violation of section 66/192A of M.V. Act. However, nothing has been produced on record by the prosecution to prove such allegation. Neither any photographs were place on record no any other documentary or any other proof was produced before the court for proving that allegation. Even both the PW1 and PW2 are at contradiction with respect to the fact whether any photograph of the vehicle was taken or not at the time of issuance of the present challan. Moreover, no public witnesses were joined in the present case to substantiate the claim of the challaning officers. The allegation is just a bare allegation without any substance.
Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 16 of 19 On the other hand, the accused has already placed on record photographs of the vehicle which were taken soon after the present challan was issued and the vehicle was deposited at the concerned pit. The said photographs are already on record and exhibited as mark DW­1/C1 to DW­1/C3.
Hence, the prosecution has miserably failed to prove any allegation against the accused, therefore, he be acquitted of all the charges levelled against him.
On the other hand, Ld. APP for the State has submitted that PSV Driving Badge training certificate which was produced before this court and a copy of which is placed on record and exhibited as mark DW­1/B was issued in favour of the accused driver post issuance of the present challan. Therefore, the accused cannot be relieved of his liability for the violation of DMVR 6/177 of M.V. Act. The said certificate was obtained by him much after the issuance of present challan and, accordingly, since he did not have valid PSV Driving Badge training certificate, he is rightly liable for violation of permit condition as well. Further, with respect to the argument of the Ld. Defence Counsel that the challaning officer did not took any photograph of the vehicle, it has already come on record in the deposition of PW1 that they are not provided with any cameras by their concerned departments, so the failure to take photograph of the vehicle cannot be made a reason to disbelieve him.

9. After hearing the submission of both the Ld. APP for the State as well as Ld. Defence Counsel, the court is of the opinion that all the points raised by the Ld. Defence Counsel are very material. The court finds merit in the arguments of Ld. Defence Counsel that since the notification which included violation of DMVR 6/177 as violation of permit condition came into operation on 15.03.2013 Vehicle No. : DL­1PC­4452 17 of 19 i.e. after the issuance of present challan, the accused cannot be made liable for violation of 66/192A of M.V. Act as the said notification was not retrospective in operation. Ld. APP for the State has also not raised any objection regarding the same. Further, with respect to the allegation that the details of the operator/owner of the vehicle and helpline number of STA was missing on the body of vehicle, nothing material has been placed on record to substantiate that allegation. Even, the challaning officer did not bothered to take any photographs of the vehicle and the reason that they are not provided with any cameras by their concerned departments cannot be accepted as an excuse for such omission. In the absence of any photograph of the vehicle it cannot be believed that the offending vehicle was actually without such detail. Moreover, non­joining of any public witnesses further makes it difficult for the court to believe the said allegation. Accordingly, the accused is acquitted for the offence U/s 66/192A of M.V. Act. However, since it is clear from the testimonies of both the prosecution witnesses as well as after perusing the copies of PSV Driving training Badge certificate that at the time of issuance of present challan, the accused was not holding any PSV Driving Training Badge or any training certificate in that regard, he is held guilty for the same and is convicted for violation of DMVR 6/177 of M.V. Act.
Let the accused/driver be heard separately on quantum of sentence. Copy of this judgment be given free of cost to the accused driver. Pronounced in the open court.

Heard on the quantum of sentence. The Ld. APP for the state has argued that the accused driver has been convicted for the offence under DMVR 6/177 of M.V. Act and therefore he should be adequately punished for the same.
On the other hand the Ld. Defence counsel for the accused has stated that accused driver has already got a PSV Driving Badge Training Certificate issued in his favour from the concerned transport authority after the issuance of present challan and smart card based PSV Badge will also be issued very soon in his favour. He has further submitted that it is first mistake of the challaning officer and that too occurred only due to ignorance of law and has prayed that a lenient view may be taken against him.
Taking into consideration the submission of both the sides and also the fact that the accused has a valid PSV Driving Badge Training Certificate in his favour as on today and also in view of the fact that he has stand for trial for one year, a lenient view is taken against the accused and he is admonished for the offence under DMVR 6/177 of M.V. Act.