Karnataka High Court
The Divisional Manager vs Basavannevva W/O Halappa ... on 1 September, 2020
Author: M.Nagaprasanna
These appeals, though listed for admission, are taken up for final disposal with the consent of the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2. These appeals under Section 173(1) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act', for short) have been filed in one by the claimants seeking enhancement of compensation and another by the Insurance Company challenging the liability and quantum against the judgment dated 14.02.2013 passed by the Additional Senior Civil Judge and Additional Motor Accident Claims Tribunal at Ranebennur, (hereinafter referred to as "the Tribunal" for short), in M.V.C.No.138/2010.
3. Parties will be referred to as per their ranking before the Claims Tribunal.
4. Facts giving rise to the filing of the appeal briefly stated in terms of the pleadings in the claim petition are that on 13.10.1998 at about 9.30 a.m., the deceased who was working as coolie was traveling in a goods vehicle for work, when the goods vehicles bearing registration No.KA.27/3862 came near Koda-
Ranebennur road, due to the rash and negligent manner of the said vehicle, the vehicle toppled and the deceased fell down sustaining grievous injuries and succumbed to the same on the spot.
5. The claimants being the legal representatives of the deceased filed a petition under Section 166 of the Act before the Tribunal in MVC.No.138/2010 on the ground that the deceased was aged about 50 years as on the date of accident and was working as a collie and was the only breadwinner of the family and accordingly claimed a compensation of Rs.15,00,000/- along with interest.
6. On issuance of notice, the insurance company appeared and contended that the claim petition ought to have been dismissed on the ground that the claimant has taken a chance before the Commissioner under the Workmen Compensation Act, in claim petition bearing W.C.No.114/2000 and after the dismissal of the claim petition has filed preset claim petition before the Tribunal invoking the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act and which is not maintainable.
7. On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Claims Tribunal framed the issues and thereafter recorded the evidence.
8. The 1 s t claimant, in order to prove their case, examined herself as P.W.1 and got exhibited 8 documents namely Exs.P1 to Ex.P.8.
On the other hand the respondents-Insurance Company examined two witnesses as R.W.1 and R.W.2 and marked three documents as Exs.R.1 to R.3, on its behalf.
9. The Claims Tribunal, by the impugned judgment, inter alia, held that the accident had occurred due to rash and negligent driving of the driver of the goods vehicle, in which, the deceased was traveling and further held that the claimants were entitled to a compensation of Rs.3,33,050/- along with interest at the rate of 6% per annum. Being aggrieved the same the claimant preferred an appeal in MFA.No.22124/2013 seeking enhancement of compensation and the 2 n d respondent-Insurance Company preferred appeal in MFA.No.21774/2013 challenging the liability fastened upon it by the Tribunal.
10. Heard learned counsel Sri B.S.Sangati, appearing for claimant and learned counsel Sri S.K.Kayakamath appearing for Insurance Company.
11. Learned counsel for the appellant-
Insurance Company would contend that that the claim filed by the claimants before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal in MVC.No.138/2010 was not maintainable for the reason that the claim had already been made by the claimants before the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation and after having failed in their attempt to get any compensation as the claim before the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation was dismissed, have taken a chance now before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal in the subject claim petition.
12. He would submit that, it is clearly barred under Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act and would place reliance upon two judgments of the Apex Court in the case of National Insurance Co.Ltd. Vs. Mastan and others reported in AIR 2006 Supreme Court 577 and subsequent judgment in the case of Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Dyamavva and others reported in 2013 ACJ 709.
13. On the other hand learned counsel for the claimants is not in a position to dispute the fact that they had preferred a claim before the Commissioner under the Workmen Compensation Act, but would contend that the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation did not dismiss claim on merits but has dismissed the claim on the ground that he has no jurisdiction and since it is without jurisdiction, the case before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal was maintainable. He would submit that the compensation awarded by the Tribunal is on lower side and requires enhancement.
14. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
15. The issue with regard to maintainability of the petitioner before the claims Tribunal is required to be considered at the outset, since it goes to the root of the matter. If the petition before the claims Tribunal was not maintainable any compensation that is granted by the claims Tribunal in a petition that is not maintainable is a nullity. Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act reads thus:
16. In terms of the afore extracted mandate of the statute, it is unmistakably clear that ones the claimant takes recourse to a particular statute for the purposes of claim of compensation cannot later file a claim before the Claims Tribunal as it would run counter to the statute where it clearly depicts that they cannot have a claim under both the statutes. The Apex Court in the case of National Insurance Co.
Ltd., Vs. Mastan and others (supra) has held as follows:
34. On the establishment of a Claims Tribunals in terms of Section 165 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the victim of a motor accident has a right to apply for comp ensation in terms of Section 166 of that Act before that Tribunal. On the establishment of the Claims Trib unal, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain a claim for compensation arising out of a motor accident, stands ousted b y Section 175 of that Act. Until the establishment of the Tribunal, the claim had to be enforced through the Civil Court as a claim in tort. The exclusiveness of the jurisdiction of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal is taken away by Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act in one instance, when the claim could also fall under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. That Section provides that death or bodily injury arising out of a motor accident which may also give rise to a claim for comp ensation under the Workmen's Compensation Act, can be enforced through the authorities under that Act, the option in that b ehalf, being with the victim or his representative. But Section 167 makes it clear that a claim could not b e maintained und er both the Acts. In other words, a claimant who becomes entitled to claim compensation both und er the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and under the Workmen's Compensation Act, because of a motor vehicle accident has the choice of p roceeding und er either of the Acts before the concerned forum. By confining the claim to the authority or Tribunal und er either of the Acts, the legislature has incorporated the concept of election of remedies, insofar as the claimant is concerned . In other words, he has to elect whether to make his claim under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 or under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. The emphasis in the Section that a claim cannot be mad e und er both the enactments, is a further reiteration of the doctrine of election incorporated in the scheme for claiming compensation. The principle 'where, either of two alternative tribunals are open to a litigant, each having jurisdiction over the matters in dispute, and he resorts for his remed y to one of such tribunals in p reference, to the other, he is precluded, as against his opponent, from any subsequent recourse to the latter" (See R.V.Evans (1854) 3 E & B 363) is fully incorporated in the scheme of Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, precluding the claimant who has invoked the Workmen's Comp ensation Act from having resort to the p rovisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, except to the limited extent permitted therein. The claimant having resorted to the Workmen's Compensation Act, is controlled by the provisions of that Act subject only to the exception recognized in Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
35. On the language of section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, and going by the principles of election of remedies, a claimant op ting to p roceed under the workmen's Compensation Act cannot take recourse to or draw inspiration from any of the p rovisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 other than what is specifically saved by Section 167 of the Act. Section 167 of the Act gives a claimant even under the Workmen's Compensation Act, the right to invoke the p rovisions of Chapter X of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 deals with what is known as 'no fault' liability in case of an accid ent. Section 140 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 imposes a liability on the owner of the vehicle to pay the compensation fixed therein, even if no fault is established against the driver or owner of the vehicle. Sections 141 and 142 deal with p articular claims on the basis of no fault liability and Section 143 re- emphasizes what is emp hasized by Section 167 of the Act that the provisions of Chap ter X of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, would apply even if the claim is mad e under the workmen's Comp ensation Act. Section 144 of the Act gives the provisions of Chap ter X of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 overriding effect.
17. The afore extracted judgment in the case of Mastan is subsequently followed by the Apex Court in the case of Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Dyamavva and others (supra), wherein the Apex Court has held as follows:
on Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, which is being extracted hereinund er:
"167. Opti on re garding claims for compensation in certain cases.-- Notwithstanding anything contained in the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) where the death of, or bodil y injury to, any person gives rise to a cl aim for compensation under this Act and also under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may without prejudice to the provisions of Chapter X claim such compensation under ei ther of those Acts but no t unde r both."
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the appellant, that the respondents had been award ed comp ensation und er the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, and as such, they were p recluded from raising a claim for comp ensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Relying on Section 167, extracted above, it was pointed out, that an option was available to the claimants to seek comp ensation either under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, or under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The claimants, according to learned counsel, had exercised the said option to seek comp ensation und er the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. In this behalf it was pointed out, that the claimants having accep ted compensation under Workmen's Comp ensation Act, 1923, were p recluded by Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, to seek comp ensation (on account of the same accid ent), und er the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. In ord er to buttress the aforesaid submission, learned counsel for the app ellant-Insurance Comp any has placed reliance on a d ecision rend ered by this Court in 2006 ACJ 528 (SC).
12. The issue to b e determined by us is, whether the acceptance of the aforesaid comp ensation would amount to the claimants having exercised their option, to seek comp ensation under the Workmen's compensation Act, 1923. The procedure under section 8 aforesaid (as noticed above) is initiated at the behest of the employer suo motu, and as such, in our view cannot be consid ered as an exercise of option by the d epend ants/ claimants to seek comp ensation und er the provision of the Workmen's Comp ensation Act, 1923. The p osition would have b een otherwise, if the dependents had raised a claim for compensation under section 10 of Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. In the said eventuality, certainly comp ensation would be paid to the dependants at the instance (and option) of the claimants. In other word s, if the claimants had moved an application under section 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, they would have been deemed to have exercised their option to seek comp ensation under the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation Act. Suffice it to state that no such application was ever filed by the respondents-claimants herein under section 10 aforesaid . In the above view of the matter, if can be stated that the respondents-claimants having never exercised their option to seek comp ensation under section 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, could not be deemed to be precluded from seeking compensation und er section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
18. In terms of the afore extracted statute i.e., Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act and law laid down by the Apex Court in the aforementioned judgments, the case on hand requires to be considered.
19. The death of the deceased on 13.10.1998, the claimants filed a claim petition before the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation, Haveri invoking the provisions of Workmen Compensation Act, 1923 in WC.No.114/2000. The Commissioner for Workmen Compensation by his order dated 15.07.2003 dismissed the claim petition holding that the claimants have failed to prove that, the deceased was working as an employee under the owner of the vehicle and the accident had occurred during the course of employment.
20. In the light of the fact that the claimants were unable to prove the same while dismissing the claim petition the Commissioner observed that in the light of the claimants not able to prove the accident the case under the Workmen Compensation Act is not be maintainable. As contended by the learned counsel for the claimants, the sentence in the order that the claim is not maintainable cannot be read in isolation to contend that the case before the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation is dismissed for want of jurisdiction. It is clear dismissal on merits.
21. If the case is dismissed on the merits of the matter, the claimants could not have filed another claim petition after six years after the dismissal of the claim petition before the Commissioner for Workmen Compensation this was clearly contrary to Section 167 of the Motor Vehicles Act and was not maintainable. If the claim was not maintainable, the Tribunal would not get jurisdiction to determine any compensation claimed by the claimant. For the aforementioned reasons, the following, : ORDER :
1. The appeal filed in MFA.No.21774/ 2013 by the insurance company is allowed.
2. The judgment and award dated 14.02.2013 passed by the Tribunal in MVC.No.138/2010 is set aside.
3. The appeal filed in MFA.No.22124/ 2013 by the claimants is dismissed.
4. The amount in deposit before this Court, if any, shall be returned to the Insurance Company.
Sd/-
JUDGE EM/-